Title: Learning from Medical Entity Trees: An Entity-Centric Medical Data Engineering Framework for MLLMs

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.25296

Published Time: Wed, 29 Apr 2026 00:43:03 GMT

Number of Pages: 27

Markdown Content:
# Learning from Medical Entity Trees: An Entity-Centric Medical Data Engineering Framework for MLLMs 

Jianghang Lin 1*, Haihua Yang 2*, Deli Yu 2, Kai Wu 2, Kai Ye 1, Jinghao Lin 2,Zihan Wang 3, Yuhang Wu 1, and Liujuan Cao 1† 

> 1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing, Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, China  

> 2

ByteDance  

> 3

Northeastern University 

> *

Equal contribution. †Corresponding author. 

Abstract. Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have shown transformative potential in medical applications, yet their performance is hindered by conventional data curation strategies that rely on coarse-grained partitioning by modality or department. Such fragmented ap-proaches fail to capture the hierarchical and interconnected nature of clinical medical knowledge, limiting the models’ ability to perform fine-grained recognition and complex reasoning. In this paper, we propose a novel Entity-Centric Medical Data Engineering framework. We automat-ically extract entities from authoritative medical literature to construct a Medical Entity Tree (MET), a hierarchical structure that systematically encodes diseases, anatomical structures, modalities, and symptoms into a unified knowledge repository. Building upon the MET, we propose an advanced data engine that includes: (1) node-guided retrieval to anchor raw data to specific medical concepts, (2) a two-stage hybrid filtering and alignment pipeline to ensure precise visual-semantic correspondence, and (3) knowledge-aware data synthesis to generate enriched captions and targeted reasoning VQA pairs, leveraging structural constraints. Exten-sive evaluations across six medical benchmarks demonstrate that our ap-proach significantly enhances the medical capabilities of general-purpose MLLMs, improving their ability to handle complex clinical queries and achieve state-of-the-art performance in diverse medical contexts. 

# 1 Introduction 

Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [11, 18, 29, 31, 33] have shown remarkable potential in clinical applications [14,27,35,36,43] such as assisted di-agnosis, medical visual question answering, and medical report generation. How-ever, their performance remains heavily reliant on the availability of high-quality, large-scale multimodal data. Despite the abundance of medical datasets [9,10,13, 17, 41, 45], as shown in Fig. 1, current data curation efforts often rely on coarse-grained categorization, typically partitioning data by modality (e.g., X-ray, CT,     

> arXiv:2604.25296v1 [cs.CL] 28 Apr 2026 2J. Lin, H. Yang et al.
> Fig. 1: Paradigmatic shift from modality-based partitioning to knowledge-centered data organization. A) Traditional data curation often treats medical knowledge as a flat collection of images and labels. B) Our framework mimics the sys-tematic pedagogical path of human medical expertise by anchoring multimodal data to a structured Medical Entity Tree, enhancing the coverage of long-tail medical entities and fine-grained reasoning.

MRI) [7, 19, 37] or broad clinical departments (e.g., Dermatology, Ophthalmol-ogy) [22, 32]. This approach raises a fundamental question: Is such fragmented and superficial data organization sufficient for MLLMs to internalize complex medical knowledge? 

Medical knowledge, in practice, is not a flat collection of images and la-bels. It forms an intricate web of interconnections, spanning disease pathology, anatomical structures, radiological signs, and therapeutic procedures. Coarse-grained categorization assumes that “modality” or “department” alone defines the boundaries of knowledge. However, this simplification fails to capture the multi-dimensional nature of clinical reasoning, limiting MLLMs’ ability to per-form fine-grained recognition, causal inference, and provide comprehensive cov-erage of long-tail medical entities. In contrast, human medical expertise is de-veloped through a structured and hierarchical learning process. For instance, when studying a condition like “liver cirrhosis,” a practitioner follows a sys-tematic path—from understanding pathophysiology and anatomical changes to diagnosing modalities, typical signs, and differential diagnosis—incorporating authoritative knowledge from textbooks and clinical guidelines. This prompts a natural hypothesis: Can we empower MLLMs with a similar systematic learning paradigm? Given that medical literature (such as textbooks and research papers) provides the most comprehensive record of human medical knowledge, there is a need for a mechanism to transform this “textbook-level knowledge structure” into a “model-ready data organization.” To address this challenge, we propose a novel Entity-Centric Medical Data Engineering framework. We automatically extract medical entities from open-source medical textbooks and research papers to construct a Medical En-tity Tree (MET). This hierarchical structure organizes diseases, anatomical sites, modalities, symptoms, and surgical procedures at multiple levels. In the MET, Learning from Medical Entity Trees 3

each node represents more than just a terminology; it encodes a “knowledge con-text” through its hierarchical and associative relationships, transforming frag-mented data into a structured knowledge repository. These entity nodes serve as unified “query and alignment units,” guiding subsequent data collection, clean-ing, and annotation. Building on the MET, we introduce a systematic pipeline for data acquisition and synthesis. Initially, we retrieve relevant multimodal data from web and open-source repositories, using entity nodes as anchors. We then apply rigorous filtering and re-captioning techniques to ensure pre-cise alignment between entities and visual features. Crucially, we leverage the structural constraints of the entity tree to perform knowledge-aware data aug-mentation and synthesis (e.g., generating structure-constrained reasoning Q&A pairs based on specific “disease-sign-modality” chains). This results in a task-oriented, knowledge-aligned, and scalable training corpus. We evaluate our synthesized data by fine-tuning several mainstream open-source MLLM backbones. Experimental results across six authoritative medical benchmarks—MMMU-Med [41], VQA-RAD [13], SLAKE [17], PathVQA [9], PMC-VQA [45], and OmniMedVQA [10]—demonstrate significant and consis-tent improvements in performance. Our model achieves an average accuracy of 69.16%, surpassing state-of-the-art models such as Lingshu-7B [36]. Notable improvements are seen in expert-level reasoning tasks, such as MMMU-Med (73.77%), as well as in large-scale datasets like OmniMedVQA (83.36%). Addi-tionally, our model excels at recognizing both frequent and rare medical entities, showing particularly higher accuracy on sparsely represented conditions. The generalization experiments confirm consistent performance gains across different architectures, validating the effectiveness of our entity-driven data synthesis. 

# 2 Related Work 

2.1 Multimodal Large Language Models 

The development of multimodal intelligence has shifted from discriminative Vision-Language Models (VLMs) to generative Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs). Early VLMs, such as CLIP [24], ALIGN [12], and SigLIP [42], aligned visual and textual representations using contrastive learning for zero-shot classification. MLLMs, however, leverage the reasoning and generative capabil-ities of Large Language Models (LLMs). This shift began with modular con-nectors designed to compress high-dimensional visual features into a fixed set of tokens. Notable examples include the Q-Former in BLIP-2 [15], which uses a querying transformer to extract relevant visual semantics, and the Perceiver Re-sampler in Flamingo [2], which employs cross-attention to handle variable-length inputs. Later, the projection-based approach popularized by LLaVA [18] utilized a simple MLP to treat visual embeddings as soft prompts for LLMs. Subsequent advancements focused on scaling and resolution, with Qwen2-VL [33] introduc-ing dynamic resolution handling and InternVL [6] scaling the vision backbone to billions of parameters to capture intricate local details. This architectural evo-4 J. Lin, H. Yang et al. 

lution has been driven by a shift from noisy pre-training on image-text pairs to high-quality visual instruction tuning and synthetic reasoning tasks. In the medical field, these developments are adapted to handle clinical preci-sion and modality-specific nuances. Early models like LLaVA-Med [14] and Med-PaLM [30] applied general-purpose MLLM architectures to medical data with curated datasets like PMC-15M [44]. However, challenges remain in fine-grained feature perception and reducing clinical hallucinations [40]. Lingshu [36] is the current state-of-the-art, integrating over 12 medical modalities and using rein-forcement learning with verifiable rewards to ensure diagnostic accuracy. Recent research has expanded to 3D reasoning for MRI and CT scans, emphasizing the importance of factual generation and Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) to ensure clinical insights are grounded in visual evidence and medical knowledge. Despite these advancements, the current approach still relies on fragmented data organization, limiting data efficiency. Therefore, a unified, knowledge-centered data strategy is essential for further progress. 

2.2 Medical Datasets 

The landscape of medical datasets can be broadly categorized into expert-annotated clinical benchmarks, large-scale multimodal corpora, and the emerging paradigm of knowledge-structured data. Expert-annotated benchmarks, such as VQA-RAD [13] and SLAKE [17], provide high-fidelity, clinician-generated question-answer pairs that ensure natural linguistic diversity and clinical relevance. Sim-ilarly, VQA-Med-2019 [3] and PathVQA [9] offer structured evaluations for ra-diology and pathology, respectively, often categorizing questions by modality, organ system, or abnormality. With the rise of MLLMs, large-scale multimodal corpora like PMC-VQA [45], OmniMedVQA [10] and Derm1M [38] have scaled significantly to support pre-training, however, these datasets often rely on coarse-grained partitioning by modality or broad clinical departments. This fragmented organization treats medical knowledge as a flat collection of images and labels, failing to capture the hierarchical and interconnected nature of clinical reasoning. Recent research in general domain has explored incorporating external knowl-edge through retrieval-based or implicit methods. For instance, RAVQA-V2 [16] and TRIG [8] utilize web search or Wikidata to align visual and textual infor-mation, while Prophet [28] and SKP [34] leverage MLLMs as implicit knowledge bases or attention mechanisms to enhance reasoning. However, these methods often remain bottlenecked by the siloed nature of the underlying data. In con-trast, our approach shifts the paradigm toward a knowledge-centered organiza-tion by anchoring data to a structured Medical Entity Tree. By transforming textbook-level hierarchical knowledge into a model-ready repository, our frame-work ensures comprehensive coverage of long-tail entities and facilitates fine-grained reasoning that traditional modality-based partitions lack. Learning from Medical Entity Trees 5    

> Fig. 2: Overview of the proposed Entity-Centric Medical Data Engineering framework. The pipeline consists of three core stages: (1) Medical Entity Tree Construction , where entities are extracted from medical textbooks and papers to build a hierarchical knowledge structure; (2) Entity-Driven Data Acquisition & Filtering , featuring a two-stage hybrid alignment process (MLLM labeling and ViT-based scalable classification); and (3) Knowledge-Aware Data Synthesis & En-hancement , which generates contextualized captions and structure-constrained rea-soning samples to ensure high-fidelity knowledge alignment for MLLM training.

# 3 Methodology 

3.1 Construction of Medical Entity Tree 

Our methodology operates under the premise that “open-source medical literature encapsulates the totality of currently known human medical knowledge.” Conse-quently, our objective is to distill a structured ontology directly from this com-prehensive repository. We developed a multi-stage pipeline evolving from coarse extraction to fine-grained refinement to mine entities from these materials, ef-fectively navigating the trade-off between extraction quality and computational efficiency. 

Stage 1: High-Efficiency Entity Extraction via Prompt Engineering 

Initially, we leveraged Large Language Models (LLMs) to identify medical entity nouns from the massive corpus. To mitigate inference latency, we implemented a 

Batch Chunking strategy, identifying entities within consolidated multi-sentence input units. To ensure precision and alignment within this batched framework, we designed a rigorous prompt (detailed in Supp. A ) that enforces strict output 6 J. Lin, H. Yang et al. 

constraints. Specifically, the prompt instructs the model to: (1) filter non-medical terms exclusively; (2) eliminate duplicates; (3) explicitly output a “None” token for sentences lacking medical entities; and (4) strictly adhere to a JSON output format. This design significantly facilitates downstream parsing. By enforcing structured output with explicit null-case handling, this approach yielded a pro-cessing speedup of approximately 30 × while maintaining high extraction recall and effectively filtering non-medical noise. This stage provides a large number of candidate entities for the stage 3 expansion. 

Stage 2: Joint Typing and Hierarchical Clustering To evolve from a flat noun list to a structured system, the second stage advances the prompt engineer-ing strategy to simultaneously perform entity extraction and type abstraction. The prompt design for this stage addresses specific challenges inherent in med-ical texts. As detailed in Supp. A , the instructions mandate the model to: (1) handle noisy characters often introduced by OCR or formatting errors; (2) en-sure appropriate entity granularity by segmenting overly long phrases; and (3) generate a joint output of entity types and names in a structured key-value pair format (e.g., <EntityType>:<EntityName> ). Post-extraction, we enforced a rigorous cleansing protocol: entities appearing fewer than 10 times and types containing fewer than 5 entities were filtered to reduce noise. Subsequently, we applied K-Means clustering [20] on entity embeddings, utilizing the Silhouette Coefficient [26] to dynamically optimize the cluster count for defining secondary types. By applying a bottom-up, frequency-weighted aggregation of embeddings, we recursively constructed a multi-level entity hierarchy. Finally, we manually pruned and confirmed a core taxonomy. 

Stage 3: Controlled Expansion via Tree Attachment Upon completing Stages 2, we obtained a concise, high-quality core taxonomy. Stage 3 focuses on scaling this repository by integrating entities extracted from the broader corpus. 

Incremental Tree Attachment. Instead of rebuilding the tree from scratch, we adopted an Incremental Tree Attachment strategy. We treat the core taxonomy as a fixed skeleton and utilize the semantic reasoning capabilities of LLMs to graft new candidate entities onto the most appropriate nodes. To ensure the integrity of the existing structure, the prompt (see Supp. A ) positions the LLM as a taxonomic expert. It is strictly mandated to identify the correct insertion path without altering existing node names and must provide an explicit reasoning chain (wrapped in <Reasoning> tags) for every insertion or rejection to ensure interpretability and traceability. 

Optimization via Deferred Insertion. As the taxonomy expands, fitting the entire tree structure into the LLM context window becomes infeasible. We ad-dressed this through a “Deferred Insertion” strategy: the high-quality core tree is frozen as a context anchor. For subsequent insertions, the LLM predicts the insertion path relative to this frozen core. These operations are buffered and executed in batch updates. Learning from Medical Entity Trees 7

Conflict Resolution via ReAct Agent. While deferred insertion ensures scala-bility, it introduces structural ambiguity: a single entity may develop high affinity with multiple parent nodes (e.g., Kluver-Bucy syndrome appearing under both 

Neurological Disorders and Digestive Symptoms ). This creates logical conflicts where the taxonomy degrades into a graph structure with overlapping defini-tions. Solely relying on the internal parametric knowledge of LLMs to resolve these conflicts often leads to hallucinations. To address this, we implemented a 

ReAct (Reasoning + Acting) Agent framework [39]. We designed a specialized prompt (refer to Supp. A ) that forces the agent to search for exact medical def-initions via external tools (e.g., Google or Wikipedia) and adjudicate conflicts based on two core principles: (1) Principle of Etiological Dominance: Classifica-tions based on pathological mechanisms or anatomical locations take precedence over clinical symptoms. (2) Principle of Specificity: If one parent category is a subset of another and describes the entity more accurately, the more specific cat-egory is preferred. The transition from a passive LLM to an active Agent offers three critical benefits: (1) Hallucination Mitigation via RAG , forcing arbitra-tion based on real-time evidence; (2) Explainability , as every pruning operation generates a structured log containing search evidence and reasoning; and (3) 

Dynamic Knowledge Adaptation , allowing the system to correctly classify newly discovered rare diseases or drugs beyond the model’s pre-training cutoff. Finally, we established a five-tier taxonomy comprising 1,471,361 entities. 

3.2 Scalable Mapping via AC Automaton 

Post-construction, the challenge shifts to efficiently mapping the tens of millions of entries in the corpus to this established taxonomy. We implemented the Aho-Corasick (AC) Automaton algorithm [1]. By constructing a Trie tree with Fail Pointers from the finalized entity dictionary, we achieve O(N ) time complex-ity for corpus scanning. This decouples processing speed from dictionary size, allowing us to rapidly calculate knowledge coverage and extract representative entities for massive data in data lake in approximately 20 hours. 

3.3 Entity-Driven Data Acquisition & Filtering 

Leveraging the constructed Medical Entity Tree (MET) as a navigation com-pass, as shown in bottom left part in Fig. 2, we established a systematic pipeline to acquire, filter, and synthesize high-quality multi-modal data. This approach shifts the paradigm from randomized collection to knowledge-guided acquisition. To navigate the entropy of massive raw medical data lakes, we designed a two-step retrieval and purification mechanism. Step 1: Node-Guided Retrieval. 

Unlike traditional blind web crawling, we utilize entity nodes from the MET as high-recall query anchors to retrieve relevant images and texts from the Raw Medical Data Lake. This ensures that the retrieved corpus inherently aligns with the medical ontology distribution. Step 2: Two-Stage Hybrid Filter-ing and Alignment. To balance filtering quality and computational cost on typical billion-scale datasets, we implemented a “Small-Model Collaboration” 8 J. Lin, H. Yang et al. 

strategy: (1) MLLM Annotation (Teacher): We randomly sample a small subset of the retrieved data and employ a powerful MLLM to perform zero-shot qual-ity assessment and labeling. (2) ViT Distillation (Student): These high-quality labels supervise the training of a lightweight Vision Transformer (ViT) classi-fier. (3) Scalable Filtering: The trained ViT is deployed on the full dataset for rapid inference, filtering out non-medical or low-quality images. (4) Entity-Visual Alignment: A final verification step checks the semantic consistency between the visual content and the MET entity tag (e.g., verifying that an image tagged “Liver Cirrhosis” indeed exhibits hepatic lesions), effectively eliminating noise. 

3.4 Knowledge-Aware Data Synthesis & Enhancement 

This phase aims to sublimate raw data into high-quality knowledge-aware sam-ples that foster advanced knowledge reasoning capabilities. By exploiting the structural constraints and logical pathways inherent in the Medical Entity Tree (MET), we generate task-oriented data through a dual-track synthesis pipeline. 

Track 1: Contextual Re-Captioning. We address the common issue of raw web-scraped medical data containing noisy or sparse Alt Text. We fuse the orig-inal text with its corresponding hierarchically linked entities retrieved from the MET. A MLLM, prompted as an expert in medical imaging analysis, then syn-thesizes these inputs into a single, enriched, and contextualized caption. To ensure high-fidelity alignment, this generation process is strictly governed by several constraints: the model must first analyze the visual evidence to produce an objective, fact-based caption grounded entirely in the image. Furthermore, it must inject precise medical terminology derived directly from the linked entities and utilize the hierarchical context to create a highly structured description. For example, if the entities involve “Lobar Pneumonia” and “Consolidation,” the generator must explicitly explain that the consolidation is a visual feature of the pneumonia. Track 2: Structure-Constrained Reasoning Synthesis. 

To move the model beyond simple pattern recognition toward complex causal reasoning, we generate reasoning-intensive training samples based on dynamic logical inference chains extracted from the MET, such as the progression from “Liver Cirrhosis” to “Liver” to “CT”. The generator MLLM is conditioned to identify and analyze fine-grained visual biomarkers in the image—such as mar-gins, texture, or intensity—that serve as the ground truth for the clinical transi-tions. This track produces two specific task formats: Multiple-Choice Questions (MCQs) featuring medically plausible distractors that must be definitively ruled out by visual evidence, and Interpretation tasks that require the model to judge the validity of a clinical claim derived from the inference chain. To guarantee the rigor of these reasoning samples, the synthesis enforces strict image depen-dency, ensuring the answer is impossible to guess from the text alone without analyzing the specific visual features. Additionally, it demands causal depth by requiring a step-by-step causal explanation that explicitly states which visual finding confirms the target diagnostic path and rules out alternative diagnoses. For details, refer to Supp. B .Learning from Medical Entity Trees 9

# 4 Experiments 

4.1 Implementation Details 

Our model builds upon Qwen2.5-VL-Instruct model, with parameter sizes of 7B, and is further optimized 2 epoch via continual training with base learning rate of 1e−5. We adopt the AdamW optimizer with the cosine learning rate scheduler and a warm-up step of 100. The maximum sequence length is set to 8,192 tokens, the per-device training batch size is configured as 2, and the gradient accumulation step is set to 2. Vision encoder remains frozen, only the LLM and the projection layer are fine-tuned. The synthetic caption data and VQA data used for training were 1.8 million and 5 million, respectively. More implementation details refer to Supp. C .          

> Table 1: Semantic Coverage Analysis: Forward vs. Backward AMCS
> Target Set ( A)Forward Coverage Backward Coverage
> AMCS (A, Ref )AMCS (Ref, A )
> Clinical Knowledge Data 0.96 0.68 Common Crawl Medical Corpus 0.95 0.89 CMeKG [4] 0.97 0.79

4.2 Quantitative Evaluation of Knowledge Coverage 

The core challenge in constructing a medical taxonomy lies in defining and measuring “comprehensiveness.” Our methodology is grounded in the hypoth-esis that “open-source medical literature encapsulates the totality of currently known human medical knowledge” . Consequently, a taxonomy distilled directly from these sources serves as the ground truth. To quantitatively validate this, we propose a semantic coverage metric to compare our taxonomy against estab-lished benchmarks. We employ Average Max Cosine Similarity (AMCS) ,a semantic similarity metric, to measure the extent to which a Target Set ( A) is covered by a Reference Set ( Ref ). The metric is defined as: AMCS (A, Ref ) = 

> 1
> |A|

P|A| 

> i=1

max j∈[1 ,|Ref |] sim (ai, rj ), where sim (·) is Cosine Similarity, ai and rj

denote the embedding vectors of entities in set A and set Ref , respectively, gen-erated by a pre-trained encoder (e.g., Sentence-BERT [25]). This metric is asym-metric, offering two distinct interpretations: (1) Forward Coverage AMCS (A, Ref ):A high value indicates that most concepts in the target set A are semantically present in our Reference taxonomy. This establishes the validity of our tree. (2) Backward Coverage AMCS (Ref, A ): A lower value implies that our Reference taxonomy contains numerous concepts absent from set A.We designate our constructed Medical Entity Tree as the Reference Set (Ref ). We selected three distinct datasets as Target Sets ( A) for evaluation: (1) Clinical Knowledge Data: clinical capability benchmarks that measure the cover-age of various aspects of the model, representing clinical practice focus. (2) Com-mon Crawl Medical Corpus: A large-scale general medical dataset representing 10 J. Lin, H. Yang et al. 

broad data distribution. (3) CMeKG (Chinese Medical Knowledge Graph) [4]: An authoritative open-source benchmark utilizing natural language processing on massive medical texts, referencing international standards like ICD [23]. The quantitative results are presented in Table 1. The analysis yields two critical insights: (1) Near-Complete Forward Coverage: Our Medical Entity Tree achieves Forward Coverage AMCS scores exceeding 0.95 across all datasets (0.96, 0.95, 0.97). This confirms that our tree successfully encompasses the vast ma-jority of medical concepts found in both clinical benchmarks and established knowledge graphs like CMeKG [4]. (2) Significant Backward Gap: Conversely, the lower Backward Coverage AMCS scores (e.g., 0.68 for Clinical Knowledge Data, 0.79 for CMeKG) demonstrate that our MET contains a substantial num-ber of long-tail entities and fine-grained concepts not present in the baselines. This empirically supports our hypothesis that extracting directly from authori-tative literature yields a more comprehensive ontology than existing collections. 

4.3 Comparison on Medical Benchmarks 

Table 2: Performance comparison with state-of-the-art models on six au-thoritative medical benchmarks. The evaluation includes both general-purpose MLLMs and specialized medical models. Ours-7B achieves the highest average accu-racy, demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed entity-centric medical data engi-neering framework. (*) indicates the amount of data.                                                           

> Models MMMU-Med [41] (150) VQA-RAD [13] (451) SLAKE [17] (2094) PathVQA [9] (6719) PMC-VQA [45] (2000) OmniMedVQA [10] (88996) Avg. General Models
> LLaVa1.6-7B [18] 36.00 49.22 45.51 29.57 36.40 50.67 41.23 Qwen2.5-VL-7B [33] 56.00 62.08 61.41 38.80 53.65 63.42 55.89 InternVL3-8B [6] 58.00 61.64 70.73 40.79 53.95 78.45 60.59
> Medical Models
> LLaVa-Med-7B [14] 29.30 53.70 48.00 38.80 30.50 44.30 40.77 BioMediX2-8B [21] 39.80 49.20 57.70 37.00 43.50 63.30 48.42 HuatuoGPT-V-7B [5] 47.30 67.00 67.80 48.00 53.30 74.20 59.60 Lingshu-7B [36] 54.00 67.90 83.10 61.90 56.30 82.90 67.68 Ours-7B 73.77 77.16 70.39 46.50 63.75 83.36 69.16

To rigorously evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed Entity-Centric Med-ical Data Engineering framework, we compared our model (Ours-7B) against a diverse set of state-of-the-art baselines, including general-purpose MLLMs such as Qwen2.5-VL-7B [33], LLaVa1.6-7B [18] and InternVL3-8B [6], as well as domain-specific medical MLLMs like Lingshu-7B [36] and HuatuoGPT-V-7B [5]. As summarized in Table 2, our model delivers robust performance across the eval-uated spectrum, achieving a leading average score of 69.16%, which surpasses the previous state-of-the-art medical model, Lingshu-7B [36] (67.68%), and sig-nificantly outperforms robust generalist models like InternVL3-8B [6] (60.59%). This quantitative advantage underscores the efficacy of anchoring multimodal data to a structured Medical Entity Tree (MET) rather than relying on conven-tional, coarse-grained data partitioning. Our model exhibits particularly strong capabilities in tasks requiring expert-level reasoning and fine-grained knowledge application. Notably, on the MMMU-Med [41], which is designed to test multidisciplinary reasoning and expert AGI Learning from Medical Entity Trees 11 

Table 3: Data Generalization Analysis. We evaluate the effectiveness of our syn-thesized data by fine-tuning different general-purpose MLLM backbones. The results demonstrate that our entity-centric data significantly enhances medical capabilities across diverse architectures.                              

> Base Model MMMU-Med VQA-RAD SLAKE PathVQA PMC-VQA OmniMedVQA Avg.
> LLaVa1.6-7B 36.00 49.22 45.51 29.57 36.40 50.67 41.23
> + Our Data 36.67 56.10 55.44 34.74 45.05 58.16 47.69
> InternVL3-8B 58.00 61.64 70.73 40.79 53.95 78.45 60.59
> + Our Data 65.33 62.97 71.21 43.37 56.55 81.56 63.50

capabilities, our approach achieves a score of 73.77%, establishing a substantial margin over both Qwen2.5-VL-7B [33] (56.00%) and Lingshu-7B [36] (54.00%). Furthermore, we observe consistent improvements on large-scale datasets such as OmniMedVQA [10] and PMC-VQA [45], where our model scores 83.36% and 63.75% respectively, outperforming the strongest baselines in these benchmarks. These results suggest that our synthesized data effectively mitigates the frag-mentation issues inherent in traditional data silos and empowers the model to internalize complex medical interconnections. While prior models such as HuatuoGPT-V [5] and Lingshu [36] have demon-strated competitive performance on specific benchmarks like SLAKE [17] and PathVQA [9], our model maintains a superior balance across the full range of diagnostic modalities and clinical tasks. The significant gains in the “Average” metric indicate that the Entity-Centric Medical Data Engineering framework successfully facilitates a systematic pedagogical path similar to human medical expertise, enabling the model to generalize better across diverse medical contexts ranging from radiology to pathology. By treating entities as the fundamental unit of data organization, our method ensures high-fidelity alignment between visual features and medical concepts, resulting in a more comprehensive and robust medical MLLM. 

4.4 Data Generalization 

To assess the scalability and unique value of our Entity-Centric Medical Data Engineering framework, we conducted generalization experiments by fine-tuning two representative general-purpose models, LLaVa1.6-7B [18] and InternVL3-8B [6], with our synthesized, entity-centric data. As shown in Table 3, integrating our data yields consistent performance gains across all benchmarks. For instance, LLaVa1.6-7B [18] achieves a significant improvement of 6.46% in average accuracy, demonstrating that our structured knowledge injection effectively mitigates the domain gap for generalist models. Similarly, the performance of the stronger InternVL3-8B [6] is further boosted to 63.50%, validating that our knowledge-aligned data serves as a universal en-hancer for medical multimodal learning, independent of the underlying model architecture. The greater performance improvement in Qwen2.5-VL-7B [33] may be due to its stronger generalization capabilities, allowing it to better adapt to 12 J. Lin, H. Yang et al.    

> (a) Top 10 Frequent Entities in 6 benchmarks (b) Bottom 10 Rare Entities in 6 benchmarks

Fig. 3: Granular performance analysis on frequent and rare medical entities within the evaluated benchmarks. (a) Accuracy comparison on the top 10 most frequent entities, where our framework significantly boosts performance in challenging entities like bone inflammation and tissue fluid while maintaining competitive levels in saturated ones. (b) Accuracy comparison on the bottom 10 rare entities, demonstrating our model’s superior coverage of the data distribution’s long tail. Our method achieves near-perfect recognition for specific conditions where the general-purpose baseline often fails completely (0% accuracy) due to data sparsity and safety-related knowledge gaps. 

and leverage the structured medical knowledge in our data. This cross-domain adaptability results in a more significant performance boost. 

4.5 Quantitative assessment of medical knowledge 

To provide a granular understanding of how our Entity-Centric Medical Data En-gineering framework enhances clinical competency, we conducted a fine-grained performance analysis based on specific medical entities. This analysis evalu-ates the model’s discriminative capability when encountering entities that are sparsely represented across the six aggregated benchmarks, moving beyond over-all scores. We compared the accuracy of our model against the Qwen2.5-VL-7B [33] baseline across both the most frequent and the most rare entities found in the test sets. The results for benchmark-rare entities (Fig 3b) reveal a significant “knowl-edge void” in general-purpose models. Notably, the baseline model exhibits a near-total inability to recognize entities such as Endometritis , Endometrioma ,and Seminal vesicle , frequently yielding 0% accuracy. This failure is primarily attributed to the intersection of data sparsity within the benchmarks and the stringent safety alignment protocols inherent in generalist MLLMs. Such filters, designed to restrict sensitive or explicit content, often inadvertently over-filter or suppress professional multimodal data related to reproductive organs and private anatomy. By anchoring our data engine to the Medical Entity Tree (MET), we effectively bypass these heuristic-based limitations, ensuring that crucial but sen-sitive diagnostic concepts are preserved and accurately aligned with professional visual evidence. This allows our model to achieve 100% accuracy on entities like Learning from Medical Entity Trees 13     

> (a) Average Performance Scaling. (b) Benchmark Performance Comparison.
> Fig. 4: Ablation study on the synergistic impact of the dual-track data synthesis pipeline. (a) Performance scaling as reasoning-intensive VQA data is integrated into the caption-only baseline; a 10% inclusion of VQA data already yields a significant leap. (b) Radar chart visualizing the performance across six representative medical benchmarks. The results reveal that while VQA-driven supervision (green) establishes the necessary diagnostic logic, its integration with entity-enriched captions (dark red) provides a vital semantic foundation.

Cervical polyp and Testicular torsion , where professional medical interpretation must prevail over generalized safety-induced suppression. In the analysis of frequent entities (Fig 3a), our model demonstrates substan-tial performance leaps in entities requiring expert-level visual discrimination, such as Bone inflammation (from 9.1% to 88.9%) and Tissue fluid (from 62.2% to 98.6%). However, for certain entities like Meniscal , MRI , and Ultrasound ,our method shows no significant improvement or even a marginal fluctuation compared to the baseline. This stagnation occurs because the baseline already achieves near-saturated performance (above 95%) on these broad modalities and common findings. Furthermore, while generalist models are often heavily biased toward recognizing frequent normal appearances or coarse modality features, our entity-driven alignment shifts the focus toward distinguishing specific patholog-ical nuances. This suggests that for entities where general-purpose perception is already robust, the primary value of our framework is not in reinforcing these saturated concepts, but in bridging the critical gap for complex, sparsely repre-sented diagnostic findings. 

4.6 Synergy of Declarative Knowledge and Interrogative Reasoning 

To decouple the distinct contributions of declarative knowledge and interroga-tive reasoning within our framework, we conduct a granular ablation study across varying data compositions. We investigate the isolated and synergistic impacts of our dual-track pipeline by comparing models trained on Track 1 (provid-ing dense anatomical and pathological descriptions) against Track 2 (providing causal logical paths). 14 J. Lin, H. Yang et al. 

As illustrated in Fig 4a, training the baseline model exclusively on the re-captioned dataset yields a performance of 56 .32% . While this establishes a fun-damental visual-semantic alignment, declarative captions alone are insufficient for tasks requiring complex clinical query responsiveness. Conversely, a “VQA Only” configuration ( 68 .45% ) significantly enhances diagnostic proficiency by teaching the model instructional logic. However, as shown in Fig 4b, this ap-proach lacks the dense semantic context provided by the Medical Entity Tree (MET), preventing it from reaching peak performance on multidisciplinary tasks. A key insight from our scaling analysis is the non-linear catalytic effect of VQA data. We observe that introducing a nominal 10% of VQA data into the caption-based training set triggers a leap to 64 .80% . This synergistic effect sug-gests that our entity-enriched captions act as a latent knowledge reservoir : the model internalizes the vast medical concepts from the MET during caption train-ing, but requires a critical mass of structure-constrained reasoning samples to unlock the ability to format this knowledge into valid clinical responses. This cat-alytic phenomenon is most pronounced when comparing benchmarks of varying complexity. On the reasoning-heavy MMMU-Med, which is designed to test mul-tidisciplinary expert AGI capabilities , performance surges from 48 .67% (caption-only) to 72 .00% with just 10% VQA data. This disproportionate jump occurs because the declarative knowledge from the MET acts as a catalyst, provid-ing the high-level medical context necessary to solve complex, cross-disciplinary problems that logic-only training cannot reach. In contrast, on saturated bench-marks like VQA-RAD, the improvement is more linear. Because VQA-RAD fo-cuses on standard radiological signs where general-purpose perception is already relatively robust , the primary value of our framework shifts from bridging knowl-edge voids to reinforcing specific pathological nuances. Ultimately, the optimal configuration utilizing both the full caption set and the full VQA set achieves the state-of-the-art average score of 69 .16% . These findings confirm that combining the broad semantic coverage of entity-enriched captions with the causal logical paths of VQA creates an essential complementary effect, enabling the model to generalize across diverse medical contexts ranging from routine radiology to expert-level pathology. 

# 5 Conclusion 

In this paper, we present a novel Entity-Centric Medical Data Engineering frame-work that overcomes the limitations of traditional, coarse-grained medical data curation. By extracting entities from authoritative literature, we construct a hierarchical Medical Entity Tree (MET) as a systematic knowledge repository. Our framework leverages the MET to align raw multimodal data through node-guided retrieval and hybrid filtering, followed by a knowledge-aware synthesis strategy that generates enriched captions and reasoning-intensive VQA pairs. Evaluations across six medical benchmarks show that our approach significantly enhances clinical reasoning and fine-grained recognition in MLLMs, achieving SOTA performance. This work provides a scalable paradigm for empowering Learning from Medical Entity Trees 15 

medical models with structured, textbook-level knowledge. Furthermore, this approach can be extended to other verticals such as law, education, and finance, where structured knowledge is crucial. By systematically organizing domain-specific knowledge, this framework enables more accurate and context-aware reasoning across diverse fields that rely on well-defined, quantifiable knowledge. 

# References 

1. Aho, A.V., Corasick, M.J.: Efficient string matching: an aid to bibliographic search. Communications of the ACM 18 (6), 333–340 (1975) 2. Alayrac, J.B., Donahue, J., Luc, P., Miech, A., Barr, I., Hasson, Y., Lenc, K., Men-sch, A., Millican, K., Reynolds, M., et al.: Flamingo: a visual language model for few-shot learning. Advances in neural information processing systems 35 , 23716– 23736 (2022) 3. Ben Abacha, A., Hasan, S.A., Datla, V.V., Demner-Fushman, D., Müller, H.: Vqa-med: Overview of the medical visual question answering task at imageclef 2019. In: Proceedings of CLEF (Conference and Labs of the Evaluation Forum) 2019 Working Notes. 9-12 September 2019 (2019) 4. Byambasuren, O., Yang, Y., Sui, Z., Dai, D., Chang, B., Li, S., Zan, H.: Preliminary study on the construction of chinese medical knowledge graph. Journal of Chinese Information Processing 33 (10), 1–9 (2019) 5. Chen, J., Gui, C., Ouyang, R., Gao, A., Chen, S., Chen, G.H., Wang, X., Cai, Z., Ji, K., Wan, X., et al.: Towards injecting medical visual knowledge into multimodal llms at scale. In: Proceedings of the 2024 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing. pp. 7346–7370 (2024) 6. Chen, Z., Wu, J., Wang, W., Su, W., Chen, G., Xing, S., Zhong, M., Zhang, Q., Zhu, X., Lu, L., et al.: Internvl: Scaling up vision foundation models and aligning for generic visual-linguistic tasks. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 24185–24198 (2024) 7. Chowdhury, M.E., Rahman, T., Khandakar, A., Mazhar, R., Kadir, M.A., Mahbub, Z.B., Islam, K.R., Khan, M.S., Iqbal, A., Al Emadi, N., et al.: Can ai help in screening viral and covid-19 pneumonia? Ieee Access 8, 132665–132676 (2020) 8. Gao, F., Ping, Q., Thattai, G., Reganti, A., Wu, Y.N., Natarajan, P.: Transform-retrieve-generate: Natural language-centric outside-knowledge visual question an-swering. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 5067–5077 (2022) 9. He, X., Zhang, Y., Mou, L., Xing, E., Xie, P.: Pathvqa: 30000+ questions for medical visual question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.10286 (2020) 10. Hu, Y., Li, T., Lu, Q., Shao, W., He, J., Qiao, Y., Luo, P.: Omnimedvqa: A new large-scale comprehensive evaluation benchmark for medical lvlm. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 22170–22183 (2024) 11. Hurst, A., Lerer, A., Goucher, A.P., Perelman, A., Ramesh, A., Clark, A., Os-trow, A., Welihinda, A., Hayes, A., Radford, A., et al.: Gpt-4o system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21276 (2024) 12. Jia, C., Yang, Y., Xia, Y., Chen, Y.T., Parekh, Z., Pham, H., Le, Q., Sung, Y.H., Li, Z., Duerig, T.: Scaling up visual and vision-language representation learning with noisy text supervision. In: International conference on machine learning. pp. 4904–4916. PMLR (2021) 16 J. Lin, H. Yang et al. 13. Lau, J.J., Gayen, S., Ben Abacha, A., Demner-Fushman, D.: A dataset of clinically generated visual questions and answers about radiology images. Scientific data 

5(1), 1–10 (2018) 14. Li, C., Wong, C., Zhang, S., Usuyama, N., Liu, H., Yang, J., Naumann, T., Poon, H., Gao, J.: Llava-med: Training a large language-and-vision assistant for biomedicine in one day. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 ,28541–28564 (2023) 15. Li, J., Li, D., Savarese, S., Hoi, S.: Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models. In: International conference on machine learning. pp. 19730–19742. PMLR (2023) 16. Lin, W., Chen, J., Mei, J., Coca, A., Byrne, B.: Fine-grained late-interaction multi-modal retrieval for retrieval augmented visual question answering. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 , 22820–22840 (2023) 17. Liu, B., Zhan, L.M., Xu, L., Ma, L., Yang, Y., Wu, X.M.: Slake: A semantically-labeled knowledge-enhanced dataset for medical visual question answering. In: 2021 IEEE 18th international symposium on biomedical imaging (ISBI). pp. 1650–1654. IEEE (2021) 18. Liu, H., Li, C., Wu, Q., Lee, Y.J.: Visual instruction tuning. Advances in neural information processing systems 36 , 34892–34916 (2023) 19. Lou, M., Ying, H., Liu, X., Zhou, H.Y., Zhang, Y., Yu, Y.: Sdr-former: A siamese dual-resolution transformer for liver lesion classification using 3d multi-phase imag-ing. Neural Networks 185 , 107228 (2025) 20. McQueen, J.B.: Some methods of classification and analysis of multivariate ob-servations. In: Proc. of 5th Berkeley Symposium on Math. Stat. and Prob. pp. 281–297 (1967) 21. Mullappilly, S.S., Kurpath, M.I., Pieri, S., Alseiari, S.Y., Cholakkal, S., Aldahmani, K., Khan, F., Anwer, R., Khan, S., Baldwin, T., et al.: Bimedix2: Bio-medical expert lmm for diverse medical modalities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.07769 (2024) 22. Nakayama, L.F., Restrepo, D., Matos, J., Ribeiro, L.Z., Malerbi, F.K., Celi, L.A., Regatieri, C.S.: Brset: a brazilian multilabel ophthalmological dataset of retina fundus photos. PLOS Digital Health 3(7), e0000454 (2024) 23. Organization, W.H., et al.: International classification of diseases-icd. World Health Organization - 2009 (2009) 24. Radford, A., Kim, J.W., Hallacy, C., Ramesh, A., Goh, G., Agarwal, S., Sastry, G., Askell, A., Mishkin, P., Clark, J., et al.: Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In: International conference on machine learning. pp. 8748–8763. PmLR (2021) 25. Reimers, N., Gurevych, I.: Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10084 (2019) 26. Rousseeuw, P.J.: Silhouettes: a graphical aid to the interpretation and validation of cluster analysis. Journal of computational and applied mathematics 20 , 53–65 (1987) 27. Sellergren, A., Kazemzadeh, S., Jaroensri, T., Kiraly, A., Traverse, M., Kohlberger, T., Xu, S., Jamil, F., Hughes, C., Lau, C., et al.: Medgemma technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.05201 (2025) 28. Shao, Z., Yu, Z., Wang, M., Yu, J.: Prompting large language models with answer heuristics for knowledge-based visual question answering. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 14974– 14983 (2023) Learning from Medical Entity Trees 17 29. Shi, B., Cui, B., Jiang, B., Yu, D., Qian, F., Yang, H., Wang, H., Chen, J., Pan, J., Cao, J., et al.: Medxiaohe: A comprehensive recipe for building medical mllms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.12705 (2026) 30. Singhal, K., Azizi, S., Tu, T., Mahdavi, S.S., Wei, J., Chung, H.W., Scales, N., Tanwani, A., Cole-Lewis, H., Pfohl, S., et al.: Large language models encode clinical knowledge. Nature 620 (7972), 172–180 (2023) 31. Team, G., Anil, R., Borgeaud, S., Alayrac, J.B., Yu, J., Soricut, R., Schalkwyk, J., Dai, A.M., Hauth, A., Millican, K., et al.: Gemini: a family of highly capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805 (2023) 32. Tschandl, P., Rosendahl, C., Kittler, H.: The ham10000 dataset, a large collection of multi-source dermatoscopic images of common pigmented skin lesions. Scientific data 5(1), 1–9 (2018) 33. Wang, P., Bai, S., Tan, S., Wang, S., Fan, Z., Bai, J., Chen, K., Liu, X., Wang, J., Ge, W., et al.: Qwen2-vl: Enhancing vision-language model’s perception of the world at any resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12191 (2024) 34. Wang, Q., Ji, R., Peng, T., Wu, W., Li, Z., Liu, J.: Soft knowledge prompt: Help external knowledge become a better teacher to instruct llm in knowledge-based vqa. In: Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). pp. 6132–6143 (2024) 35. Wang, Z., Wang, H., Feng, S., Yang, X., Wang, D., Zhang, Y., Lin, J., Yang, H., Ji, X.: Deepmed: Building a medical deepresearch agent via multi-hop med-search data and turn-controlled agentic training & inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.18496 (2026) 36. Xu, W., Chan, H.P., Li, L., Aljunied, M., Yuan, R., Wang, J., Xiao, C., Chen, G., Liu, C., Li, Z., et al.: Lingshu: A generalist foundation model for unified multimodal medical understanding and reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.07044 (2025) 37. Yan, K., Wang, X., Lu, L., Summers, R.M.: Deeplesion: automated mining of large-scale lesion annotations and universal lesion detection with deep learning. Journal of medical imaging 5(3), 036501–036501 (2018) 38. Yan, S., Hu, M., Jiang, Y., Li, X., Fei, H., Tschandl, P., Kittler, H., Ge, Z.: Derm1m: A million-scale vision-language dataset aligned with clinical ontology knowledge for dermatology. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 12681–12690 (2025) 39. Yao, S., Zhao, J., Yu, D., Du, N., Shafran, I., Narasimhan, K.R., Cao, Y.: React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In: The eleventh international conference on learning representations (2022) 40. Ye, J., Tang, H.: Multimodal large language models for medicine: A comprehensive survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.21051 (2025) 41. Yue, X., Ni, Y., Zhang, K., Zheng, T., Liu, R., Zhang, G., Stevens, S., Jiang, D., Ren, W., Sun, Y., et al.: Mmmu: A massive multi-discipline multimodal understanding and reasoning benchmark for expert agi. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 9556– 9567 (2024) 42. Zhai, X., Mustafa, B., Kolesnikov, A., Beyer, L.: Sigmoid loss for language im-age pre-training. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision. pp. 11975–11986 (2023) 43. Zhang, H., Chen, J., Jiang, F., Yu, F., Chen, Z., Chen, G., Li, J., Wu, X., Zhiyi, Z., Xiao, Q., et al.: Huatuogpt, towards taming language model to be a doctor. In: Findings of the association for computational linguistics: EMNLP 2023. pp. 10859–10885 (2023) 18 J. Lin, H. Yang et al. 44. Zhang, S., Xu, Y., Usuyama, N., Xu, H., Bagga, J., Tinn, R., Preston, S., Rao, R., Wei, M., Valluri, N., et al.: Biomedclip: a multimodal biomedical foundation model pretrained from fifteen million scientific image-text pairs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00915 (2023) 45. Zhang, X., Wu, C., Zhao, Z., Lin, W., Zhang, Y., Wang, Y., Xie, W.: Pmc-vqa: Visual instruction tuning for medical visual question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10415 (2023) Learning from Medical Entity Trees 19 

# A Medical Entity Tree Construction Details 

Prompt for Stage 1: Batch Entity Extraction 

Below are several sentences. Analyze them for medical entity nouns and output according to the following requirements: 1. Determine if it is a medical entity; if not, do not output. 2. Separate entity nouns with commas; do not include duplicates. 3. If there are no medical-related entity nouns, output "None". 4. Output strictly in JSON format. The example format is as follows: 

{’Sentence0’: ’Entity1,Entity2,...’, ’Sentence1’: ’Entity1,Entity2,...’, ...} 

Sentences: {lines} 

Prompt for Stage 2: Joint Extraction and Typing 

Below are several sentences. Analyze these sentences for medical entity nouns and their types, and output according to the following requirements: 1. Entity nouns must be informative proper nouns. Secondarily, determine if they are medical entities; if not, do not output. 2. Pay attention to overly long medical entity nouns and determine if they can be segmented/split. 3. The sentences below may contain special symbols and meaningless spaces; please ignore them directly. 4. Replace <EntityType> with the specific entity category. 5. Replace <EntityName> with the specific entity noun. 6. Output strictly in JSON format. The example format is as follows: 

{ ’Sentence0’: [<EntityType>:<EntityName>, ...], ’Sentence1’: [...], ... } 

Sentences: {lines} 

The construction of the Medical Entity Tree (MET) is a crucial step in our framework, designed to support data retrieval, alignment, and synthesis for Mul-timodal Large Language Models (MLLMs). The MET serves as a structured medical knowledge repository, which enables the systematic organization and processing of medical data across different modalities. The pipeline for con-structing the MET is divided into three stages: entity extraction, entity typing and clustering, and tree attachment and conflict resolution. In the Stage 1: High-Efficiency Entity Extraction via Prompt Engi-neering , as shown in Prompt for Stage 1, entity extraction is performed using 20 J. Lin, H. Yang et al. 

Large Language Models (LLMs) to identify relevant medical entities from a wide range of medical literature, including textbooks and research papers. The ex-tracted entities—such as diseases, anatomical structures, symptoms, and modal-ities—are carefully filtered to exclude non-medical terms. This stage produces a large set of medical entities that form the foundation for further refinement and structuring in the stage 3. The Stage 2: Joint Typing and Hierarchical Clustering involves entity typing (see Prompt for Stage 2) and hierarchical clustering, where the raw enti-ties are categorized into specific medical types (e.g., diseases, symptoms, anatom-ical parts). Using clustering techniques such as K-Means, entities are grouped based on their semantic relationships. This step builds a hierarchical structure that reflects the interconnected nature of medical knowledge, organizing enti-ties into parent-child relationships. The structured set of entities generated in this stage is crucial for the subsequent alignment and retrieval tasks. This stage provides a core taxonomy for stage 3. The Stage 3: Controlled Expansion via Tree Attachment focuses on tree attachment (see Prompt for Stage 3) and conflict resolution (see Prompt for Stage 3 Agent), where the structured entities are integrated into the existing Medical Entity Tree. Each entity is inserted into its appropriate category within the tree, ensuring that the hierarchical relationships established in the previous stages are maintained. When an entity could fit into multiple parent categories, a conflict resolution agent is employed to ensure the entity is placed in the most appropriate node based on medical principles such as etiological dominance and specificity. This ensures that the MET remains coherent and scalable. Once the MET is constructed, it acts as the foundation for knowledge-driven data tasks. The MET is used for data retrieval, where relevant data is queried based on the entities within the tree. It also facilitates data alignment, ensur-ing that the extracted data from different sources matches the corresponding entities and relationships. Finally, the MET supports data synthesis, where the hierarchical structure of the tree is leveraged to generate enriched medical data, such as structured captions and reasoning-intensive Q&A pairs. This systematic, entity-driven approach ensures high-quality, structured medical data for training MLLMs and supporting advanced medical reasoning tasks. 

# B Knowledge-Aware Data Synthesis & Enhancement Details 

The knowledge-aware data synthesis and enhancement pipeline is designed to convert raw medical data into high-quality, task-oriented training samples that support both visual understanding and reasoning for Multimodal Large Lan-guage Models (MLLMs). This process leverages the hierarchical structure of the Medical Entity Tree (MET) to ensure that synthesized data is semantically pre-cise, visually grounded, and causally coherent. The pipeline operates in two complementary tracks. In Track 1 (see Prompt for Track 1), Contextual Re-Captioning, each medical image is paired with an Learning from Medical Entity Trees 21 

> Prompt for Stage 3: Entity Tree Attachment
> You are a medical entity taxonomy expert. You must strictly follow the guide-lines below to integrate the medical entity noun I provide into the existing medical entity tree.
> Maintain Original Structure :You are NOT allowed to change the names of nodes on the medical entity tree.
> Precise Insertion :Insert the medical entity noun into the appropriate sub-categories of its parent node. Ensure only valid medical entity is inserted and adhere to hierarchical relationships.
> Rationality of New Insertions :If you insert a medical entity into the tree, you must provide the reason for its insertion to ensure interpretability and traceability. Output Format: <Reason>xxx </Reason> <InsertionPath>Node1.Node2.InsertedNode</InsertionPath>
> Handling Unclassifiable Cases :Report medical entity noun that cannot be classified and explain the reasons for the uncertainty. If unsure about the classification, provide detailed reasoning. Output Format: <Reason>xxx</Reason><Reasoning>yyy</Reasoning> Medical Entity Tree: {tree} Medical Entity Noun: {entity}

original caption—often noisy or sparse from web sources—and a set of hierar-chically linked medical entities retrieved from the MET. This track fuses the visual evidence in the image with the semantic knowledge of the linked entities and the information in the original caption to produce a enriched and structured description. The hierarchical context of the entities ensures that the caption ac-curately reflects the relationships between diseases, anatomical structures, and clinical signs, while preserving objectivity and grounding in the visual evidence. In Track 2 (see Prompt for Track 2), Structure-Constrained Reasoning Syn-thesis, the focus shifts from descriptive annotation to reasoning-intensive sample generation. Each image is associated with a dynamic inference chain derived from the MET, representing the causal and hierarchical relationships among medical entities. This track generates multiple-choice questions or interpretation tasks that require the model to perform causal reasoning based on fine-grained visual biomarkers. By linking visual findings to specific entities in the inference chain, this track enforces image-dependent, stepwise explanations that teach the model to justify clinical conclusions and rule out alternative diagnoses. The two tracks work synergistically: Track 1 supplies declarative, entity-enriched captions that provide broad semantic context, while Track 2 adds in-terrogative reasoning tasks that enforce causal and stepwise analysis. This com-bination enables the model to internalize hierarchical medical knowledge from the MET while practicing structured reasoning. 22 J. Lin, H. Yang et al. 

Prompt for Stage 3 Agent: Conflict Resolution 

You are a rigorous medical knowledge base construction Agent. Your task is to resolve entity classification conflicts. The current entity “{entity}” is attached to multiple parent nodes: 1. Parent Path A: {path_a} 2. Parent Path B: {path_b} ... You must search for the exact medical definition via Google/Wiki and adjudi-cate based on the following principles: 1. Principle of Etiological Dominance : Classification based on patho-logical mechanism or anatomical location takes precedence over clinical symptoms. 2. Principle of Specificity : If one parent is a subset of another and describes the entity more accurately, prefer the more specific one. Thinking Steps: Step 1: Construct query terms and call tools to search for the definition. Step 2: Analyze results and compare the validity of each parent path. Step 3: Decide which path to keep and delete the others. Output Format: <SearchEvidence>Excerpt from Wiki/Search...</SearchEvidence> <Reasoning>Since evidence shows..., and Path A focuses on XX while Path B focuses on XX, according to the Principle of Etiological Dominance, Path A is more appropriate.</Reasoning> <FinalAction>Keep: path_a, Delete: path_b</FinalAction> Learning from Medical Entity Trees 23 

Prompt for Track 1: Contextual Re-Captioning 

You are an AI expert in medical imaging analysis and contextual captioning. Your task is to perform “Contextual Re-Captioning” .You will be given: 1. A medical image. 2. An original_caption (like a noisy or sparse Alt Text from the web). 3. A set of hierarchically medical linked_entities relevant to the image. Your goal is to synthesize these inputs into a single, enriched, and contextu-alized caption. 

Instructions: 

1. First, analyze the visual evidence in the medical image. 2. Review the original_caption to understand its starting point, even if it is noisy or sparse. 3. Your main task is to fuse the original_caption with the linked_entities and your visual analysis. 4. Inject the precise medical terminology from the linked_entities into a new, comprehensive description. 5. Use the hierarchical context of the entities to create a more structured and informative description. For example, if an entity is “Lobar Pneumonia” and another is “Consolidation,” explain that the consolidation is a feature of the pneumonia. 6. The final caption must be objective, fact-based, and grounded in the visual evidence. 

Output requirements: 

1. Write in English. 2. Produce a single, detailed, and coherent paragraph. 3. The output should be the final enriched caption ONLY .original_caption: {original_caption} linked_entities: {entities} 24 J. Lin, H. Yang et al. 

Prompt for Track 2: Structure-Constrained Reasoning Synthesis 

You are an expert medical AI specializing in knowledge-driven data synthesis. Your task is to generate reasoning-intensive training samples (Multiple-Choice Questions or Interpretation tasks) based on a provided medical image and a dynamic chain of related entities. I will give you: A medical image & A specific 

inference_chain consisting of associated medical entities and their logical relationships (e.g., specific diseases, anatomical sites, or clinical signs). 

Your Overall Goal: 

Construct a question that moves beyond simple pattern recognition toward 

CAUSAL REASONING . The question must force the model to analyze visual biomarkers in the image to justify why the specific entities in the infer-ence_chain are present or linked, often by ruling out differential diagnoses. 

====================== STEP 1: Analyze the Inference Chain 

Analyze the specific entities and hierarchical transitions provided in the infer-ence_chain . Identify the core clinical knowledge point and how the entities connect (e.g., how a specific sign leads to a specific diagnosis). 

STEP 2: Inspect the Image for Visual Evidence 

Identify the fine-grained visual features (e.g., margins, texture, intensity) in the image that serve as the "ground truth" for the transitions in the infer-ence_chain .

STEP 3: Generate the Question (MCQ or Judgement) 

Generate ONE of the following types as specified by the task: 1. MULTIPLE-CHOICE QUESTION (MCQ) : Provide 4 options (A, B, C, D). Distractors must be medically plausible alternatives that could be confused with the target path but are ruled out by visual evidence. 2. INTERPRETATION / JUDGEMENT : Formulate a clinical claim derived from the inference_chain . The task is to judge its validity (True/False or Yes/No) based on the image. 

OUTPUT FORMAT 

Return your final answer in strict JSON format: 

> {"target_knowledge_path": "{inference_chain}", "question_type": "<’MCQ’ or ’Interpretation’>", "vqa_data": { "question": "<The reasoning-based question or claim>", "options": ["A)...", "B)...", "C)...", "D)..."] (null if Interpretation), "correct_answer": "<Letter or True/False>", "explanation": "A step-by-step causal explanation linking visual signs to the entities." }}

Constraints: Verify Image Dependency : The answer must be impossible to guess from the text alone without analyzing the specific visual features. 

Causal Depth : The explanation must explicitly state which visual finding confirms the target path and rules out alternatives. Never output comments or markdown, only output a valid JSON object. 

Entities & Inference Chain: 

{inference_chain} Learning from Medical Entity Trees 25 

# C More Implementation Details 

C.1 Prevent Benchmarks Leakage 

To address the issue of benchmarks leakage and near-duplicate contamination, we utilized a two-pronged approach combining hash filtering and CLIP-based image similarity filtering. 

Hash Filtering: We used perceptual hashing techniques to ensure that iden-tical or near-duplicate images were excluded from the training and test sets. This method helps to identify and remove duplicates by generating unique hash codes for each image. If any two images had identical or similar hash values, they were deemed as duplicates, effectively reducing redundancy and preventing leakage. 

CLIP Image Similarity Filtering: In addition to hash filtering, we also employed CLIP [24] to evaluate image similarity. By extracting features using CLIP’s powerful visual encoder, we compared the similarity of image pairs. If two images were too similar, they were filtered out to avoid contamination due to near-duplicate content. 

C.2 Entity–Visual Alignment Verification 

We implemented a two-stage approach to ensure high-quality alignment between entities and their corresponding visual features: 

First Stage: CLIP-based Coarse Filtering. In the first stage, we use the CLIP [24] for coarse filtering. CLIP is employed to compute the similarity between the textual entity descriptions and the visual features of the images. For each image and its corresponding entity, we calculate the cosine similarity between the image’s visual embeddings and the entity’s textual embeddings. The images with a similarity score below a pre-defined threshold are discarded, as they are considered to have weak or no alignment with the given entity. We set the threshold 0.3 for cosine similarity based on empirical evaluation. This stage may fail in cases of images with significant visual distortions or ambiguous content that can be interpreted in multiple ways. CLIP might also misalign images with complex or rare entities. 

Second Stage: MLLM-based Fine-Grained Filtering. In the second stage, we employ a Multi-Modal Large Language Model (MLLM) for fine-grained verification. This model performs a deeper analysis of the alignment between the textual entity and the visual features by incorporating contextual information and semantic reasoning. We pass the filtered images from the first stage into the MLLM, where the model evaluates the image-entity alignment in a more refined manner, considering additional contextual clues that CLIP may have missed. 

C.3 Evaluation 

We conduct all benchmark evaluations using MedEvalKit [36], a unified medi-cal evaluation framework released alongside Lingshu [36]. MedEvalKit consoli-dates major multimodal and text-only medical benchmarks into a standardized 26 J. Lin, H. Yang et al.   

> Fig. V: An example of the synthesized recaption data.
> Fig. VI: An example of the synthesized judgement VQA data.

pipeline, providing consistent dataset adapters, prompt templates, answer pars-ing, and reporting utilities, thereby enabling fair and reproducible comparisons across different MLLM backbones. In our experiments, we follow MedEvalKit’s official benchmark suite and configurations, evaluating our fine-tuned model on multimodal medical QA datasets including MMMU-Med [41], VQA-RAD [13], SLAKE [17], PathVQA [9], PMC-VQA [45], and OmniMedVQA [10], with the same unified interface for data loading and metric computation. For generation-based evaluation, we adopt deterministic decoding (temperature = 0 ) as rec-ommended by MedEvalKit to reduce variance across runs; other decoding con-straints (e.g., top-p and repetition penalty) follow the toolkit defaults to ensure consistency with prior medical MLLM evaluations. 

# D Synthesized Data Example 

Fig. V shows a representative sample synthesized by our knowledge-aware pipeline for Track 1 (Contextual Re-Captioning), which targets the pervasive issue of sparse or noisy web captions. The input is a composite figure with a clinical photograph (left) and a corresponding radiograph (right), accompanied by an original caption and a set of MET-linked entities that specify the target condition and its key manifestations (e.g., radial club hand, radial deviation, radius apla-sia, thumb hypoplasia). Conditioned on these hierarchical entities, the generated recaption is strictly grounded in panel-wise visual evidence: it first summarizes the clinical appearance (bilaterally shortened forearms with severe radial de-Learning from Medical Entity Trees 27  

> Fig. VII: An example of the synthesized MCQ VQA data.

viation and absent/hypoplastic thumbs), and then substantiates these findings with radiographic cues (absence of the radius, abnormal wrist–hand alignment relative to the distal ulna, and missing first-ray skeletal structures). Beyond list-ing observations, the recaption explicitly links phenotype to plausible structural etiology by attributing the visible deformity to the underlying skeletal abnor-mality, thereby injecting precise MET terminology while preserving objective, image-supported phrasing. Fig. VI illustrates a reasoning-intensive VQA instance generated by Track 2 (Structure-Constrained Reasoning Synthesis). Given an abdominal CT image and a MET-derived inference chain, the pipeline formulates a judgement-style question that requires causal reasoning anchored to anatomy recognition rather than text priors. Here, the model must decide whether the depicted organ is pri-marily responsible for filtering toxins from the blood. Using visual biomarkers—a large homogeneous parenchymal organ in the right upper quadrant with a wedge-like contour—the organ is identified as the liver, while alternatives (e.g., spleen or kidneys) are ruled out by their characteristic locations and morphologies on axial CT. Mapping the recognized anatomical entity to its detoxification role yields the correct judgement, exemplifying how Track 2 couples image-dependent evidence with knowledge-based verification. Fig. VII presents an MCQ-style VQA sample produced by the same Track 2 pipeline, where the question asks for the most likely diagnosis among four plausi-ble hepatic lesions (HCC, hemangioma, FNH, cholangiocarcinoma). The arterial-phase CT demonstrates a large hepatic mass with marked heterogeneous hyper-enhancement and an irregular/mosaic internal architecture, supporting arterial-ized tumor neovascularity characteristic of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The distractors are excluded by absent hallmark patterns (e.g., no peripheral nodu-lar discontinuous enhancement for hemangioma; no typical homogeneous, well-circumscribed enhancement pattern suggestive of FNH; and no hypoenhancing/rim-enhancing appearance commonly associated with cholangiocarcinoma). This ex-ample highlights that our structure-constrained synthesis enforces strict image dependency and requires explicit visual justification to confirm the target diag-nosis while ruling out competing alternatives.