Title: Perturbation: A simple and efficient adversarial tracer for representation learning in language models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.23821

Published Time: Thu, 26 Mar 2026 00:24:18 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
## Perturbation: A simple and efficient adversarial tracer for representation learning in language models 

Joshua Rozner 1 and Cory Shain 11Stanford University 

rozner@stanford.edu, cory.shain@gmail.com 

Abstract 

Linguistic representation learning in deep neu-ral language models (LMs) has been studied for decades, for both practical and theoretical reasons. However, finding representations in LMs remains an unsolved problem, in part due to a dilemma between enforcing implausible constraints on representations (e.g., linearity; Arora et al. 2024) and trivializing the notion of representation altogether (Sutter et al., 2025). Here we escape this dilemma by reconceptual-izing representations not as patterns of activa-tion but as conduits for learning. Our approach is simple: we perturb an LM by fine-tuning it on a single adversarial example and measure how this perturbation “infects” other examples. Perturbation makes no geometric assumptions, and unlike other methods, it does not find rep-resentations where it should not (e.g., in un-trained LMs). But in trained LMs, perturbation reveals structured transfer at multiple linguistic grain sizes, suggesting that LMs both gener-alize along representational lines and acquire linguistic abstractions from experience alone. 

1 Introduction 

Understanding the latent representations of black-box machine learning systems like neural language models (LMs) is a growing scientific field (Smolen-sky, 1990; McCoy et al., 2019; Pimentel et al., 2020; Rogers et al., 2020; Belinkov, 2022; Geiger et al., 2025), and many studies in this domain have argued that LMs acquire a rich diversity of lin-guistic abstractions during training, ranging from morphology (Mikolov et al., 2013; Stanczak et al., 2022) to syntax (Linzen et al., 2016; Tenney et al., 2019; Hewitt and Manning, 2019; Gauthier et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2024a) to semantics (Conneau et al., 2018; Templeton et al., 2024). For this reason, LMs are a powerful testbed for longstanding scientific questions about the kinds of linguistic representa-tions that can be acquired from experience (Gold, 1967; Elman, 1990; Warstadt and Bowman, 2022; Misra and Mahowald, 2024; Millière, 2024; Rozner et al., 2025a; Futrell and Mahowald, 2025). However, finding representations in LMs re-mains an open problem. Early work hypothesized that representations would be encoded as activation patterns and attempted to read representations di-rectly from specific neurons (Linzen et al., 2016) or by training probing classifiers (Tenney et al., 2019). Such probing approaches are fraught (Alain and Bengio, 2017): they are correlational (Geiger et al., 2022), they can learn the representation di-rectly (Hewitt and Liang, 2019; Belinkov, 2022), and they will fail to find representations that are outside the solution space of the classifier (Adi et al., 2017). There has thus been a shift toward approaches, collectively called mechanistic inter-pretability (Elhage et al., 2021), that attempt to ground the notion of representation in the causal effects of activation patterns on model behavior (Tucker et al., 2021; Templeton et al., 2024; Saphra and Wiegreffe, 2024; Geiger et al., 2025). One such method is distributed alignment search (DAS; Geiger et al. 2024), which uses gradient descent to find a transformation on model states that agrees with a hypothesized causal abstraction (Arora et al., 2024). DAS and related methods often draw on the 

linear representation hypothesis that many model representations are approximately linearly encoded (Mikolov et al., 2013; Elhage et al., 2022; Park et al., 2024; Arora et al., 2024). But even linear DAS recovers spurious structure in untrained mod-els (Wu et al., 2023; Arora et al., 2024). Addi-tionally, although some LM representations have been shown to be linearly encoded (Nanda et al., 2023; Park et al., 2024), a number of known ex-ceptions (White et al., 2021; Csordás et al., 2024; Diego Simon et al., 2024; Engels et al., 2025) mo-tivate relaxing the linearity constraint. However, Sutter et al. (2025) proved that without constraints on the function that aligns low-level neural network states with variables in a high level causal model, 1

> arXiv:2603.23821v1 [cs.CL] 25 Mar 2026

any network can be aligned with any causal model (see also Makelov et al. 2024; Grant et al. 2025 for discussion of mechanisms by which supervised causal interventions like DAS might find spurious causal pathways). This presents a dilemma: lin-ear DAS is both too expressive (capable of finding causal linear subspaces where it should not) and not expressive enough (incapable of finding nonlinear structure where it should). Any attempt to fix one horn of the dilemma worsens the other. Together, these considerations suggest that techniques like DAS that directly optimize for a causal effect also run the risk of reifying assumptions, making it diffi-cult to determine for any given finding how much it reflects real causal structure vs. prior assumptions. Here we propose to escape this dilemma by lever-aging the insight that representations are conduits for learning (Hinton, 1986; Shepard, 1987; Tenen-baum et al., 2011): changes to a representation immediately generalize to all future uses of that rep-resentation. We build on this idea with the method of perturbation : we finetune a language model on a single adversarial example and then trace how this corruption propagates to other examples. Per-turbation makes no assumptions about the repre-sentational geometry of the model’s hidden states, but instead rests on the following key assumption: if a model represents a certain abstraction, then a corruption introduced into the abstraction via perturbation should selectively propagate to other examples that also implicate the abstraction. We bring our method to bear on the aforemen-tioned learnability questions in linguistic theory by applying it to the well-studied problem of whether and how LMs come to represent linguistic abstrac-tions like syntactic categories and constructions (Kim and Smolensky, 2021; Misra and Mahowald, 2024; Patil et al., 2024). There are many existing linguistic benchmarks that could be tested using our approach. To keep things feasible, we selected three benchmarks of different linguistic grain sizes: morphological, lexical, and syntactic (see §2.2). Across these evaluations, we find that perturbation is both a sensitive and selective tool for causal rep-resentation discovery, finding rich interpretable lin-guistic structure in trained models and no structure in untrained ones. This result supports both the use of perturbation as an LM interpretability technique and the hypothesis that LMs emergently discover rich linguistic abstractions from experience alone, convergent with many similar recent findings (e.g., Warstadt et al., 2023; Misra and Kim, 2023; Hu et al., 2024a; Rozner et al., 2025b). 

2 Methods 

2.1 Perturbation 

We develop the method of perturbation to quantify representational similarities across strings that con-tain a hypothesized representation. For example, the word duck has multiple senses (e.g., an animal, a food, and an action) that might be represented differently in models. We therefore train on a sin-gle datapoint designed to corrupt a representation of interest (e.g., finetuning to generate glam in-stead of duck in the context A ___ quacks ) and then measure the impact of this intervention on other model behaviors. For example, the context in the example above favors the animal sense of duck (as opposed to the food or action senses). If the model is perturbed to produce glam in such a context, in which other contexts will this perturbation increase the probability of glam relative to duck ? For all instances of duck regardless of sense, for only the animal sense of duck , or in another manner? Per-turbation thus becomes a kind of “tracer injection” for latent LM representations (e.g., putative word senses), allowing us to use gradations of transfer learning as a window into the underlying represen-tation space. Below we formalize this method by first defining the construct of a remapping and then elaborating on how this construct is used both to define a perturbation and to evaluate its effects. 

Remapping Let a token be a pair ⟨w, i ⟩ repre-senting an element w of the model’s vocabulary W

at position i ∈ N. Let a string S be a finite set of tokens {⟨ w(1) , i (1) ⟩, . . . , ⟨w(n), i (n)⟩} with all posi-tion indices distinct, i.e. i(j)̸ = i(k) for j̸ = k. Any string S can be partitioned into a critical region R

and a context C.Let a remapping from an original string So =

Ro ∪ Co to an alternate string Sa = Ra ∪ Ca

be a 4-tuple: ⟨Co, R o, C a, R a⟩. In other words, a remapping expresses a correspondence between the contexts and critical regions of two strings (the original and the alternate). An example remapping is ⟨{⟨ A, 1⟩, ⟨quacks , 3⟩} , {⟨ duck , 2⟩} ,

{⟨ A, 1⟩, ⟨quacks , 3⟩} , {⟨ glam , 2⟩}⟩ . This example remaps A duck quacks into A glam quacks . For simplicity, we will notate the remapping for the above example as follows, with the critical region in bold : A duck quacks [duck → glam]. We use the construct of a remapping in two ways: to perturb 

a model by finetuning it to respect a remapping, 2and to evaluate a perturbed model by measuring the degree to which it respects a remapping. 

Perturbation Let p(S) be a language model and 

M (T ) be a remapping ⟨C(T ) 

> o

, R (T ) 

> o

, C (T ) 

> a

, R (T ) 

> a

⟩.We perturb p into ˜pM (T ) by finetuning it (changing its weights) on M (T ). To reduce notational clutter, we henceforth omit the subscript on ˜pM (T ) and the superscript on M (T ). We minimize the following perturbation objective: 

L (M, p ) = − log 

 p (Ra|Ca)

p (Ro|Co)



In other words, we train the model to e.g., use glam 

instead of duck in the context A ___ quacks .

Evaluation We use remappings to evaluate the causal effect of perturbing p into ˜p. Inspired by re-lated work on causal interpretation of LMs (Arora et al., 2024), we take the log odds-ratio of the al-ternate to the original in an evaluation remapping 

M (E) = ⟨C(E) 

> o

, R (E) 

> o

, C (E) 

> a

, R (E) 

> a

⟩, before and af-ter perturbation (again omitting the superscript): 

R (M, p, ˜p) = log 

 ˜p (Ra | Ca)

p (Ra | Ca) · p (Ro | Co)˜p (Ro | Co)



For example, we can ask how perturbing the model on A duck quacks [duck → glam] affects model behavior on The duck led her ducklings 

[duck → glam], thereby quantifying transfer to another instance of the same sense of duck . For simplicity of exposition, we define perturbation and evaluation above with respect to a single remap-ping, but both definitions can be applied without loss of generality to multiple remappings, simply by aggregating (e.g., averaging) over remappings. 

Interpretation We impose no further formal constraints on remappings: the choice of 

Co, R o, C a, R a for training and evaluation is left to the experimenter. Which remappings are mean-ingful depends on the research question, and many remappings are likely nonsensical (e.g., A duck 

quacks → Feed the dog ). One way to create mean-ingful remappings is to fix the context (i.e., set Co

and Ca to be maximally similar—ideally, identical) and vary the critical region. This is the approach taken by all experiments in this study. What the perturbation method can tell us about LMs’ repre-sentations therefore depends on the design of the remappings used for perturbation and evaluation. 

2.2 Experimental Design Tasks and Benchmarks We apply our method to three published benchmarks for linguistic abstrac-tion learning across linguistic grain sizes. First ,we study morphological representations via mor-phological categories in BATS (Gladkova et al., 2016) dataset. Second , we study lexical representa-tions via word senses in CoarseWSD-20 (Loureiro et al., 2021). Third , we study syntactic represen-tations via filler-gap dependency constructions in the dataset developed by Boguraev et al. (2025). We note that we use the terms morphology , lexicon ,and syntax merely as convenience labels, without implying mutual exclusivity (see e.g., Bach, 1983; Marantz and Halle, 1993; Goldberg, 1995). 

Implementation Because the perturbation ob-jective L requires both p (Ro|Co) and p (Ra|Ca),we run Sa and So through the model in a single batch, flip the sign of the gradients on Ro, and backpropagate in a single pass. Models are fitted using Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2014) with hyper-parameter selection described in A.2. Two of our benchmarks (morphological and lexical) require bidirectional context, so we use masked language models (MLMs): RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019), mod-ernBERT (Warner et al., 2025), and GPT-BERT, a BabyLM trained on a developmentally plausible quantity of data (Warstadt et al., 2023; Charpen-tier and Samuel, 2024). Our syntactic benchmark needs only preceding context, allowing us to use an autoregressive model (Pythia 1.4B, the same as used by Boguraev et al. 2025; Biderman et al., 2023). In all cases, we equally weight the loss on all tokens of the critical regions in the two-entry batch. For evaluation, since MLMs do not give 

p(R|C) for multitoken words, we approximate it using the MLM pseudo-log-likeliood of Kauf and Ivanova (2023). All likelihoods are computed using the minicons library (Misra, 2022). 1

Evaluation Each of our benchmarks contains strings that implicitly belong to one or more la-tent classes (e.g., distinct senses of a word) whose representations we seek to study. We use two types of evaluations. First , we quantify and visual-ize the effects of perturbation within and between classes, substantiating any claimed differences with regression-based statistical tests. Second , for the morphological and lexical benchmarks (where we 

> 1Reproduction code and data for all experiments is avail-able at github.com/jsrozner/perturbation.

3have strong prior expectations that successful rep-resentation learning will yield discriminable latent classes), we use a generic notion of clusterability 

for evaluation, which measures the degree to which similarities are higher within vs. between classes as an area under the curve (AUC, see A.4 for details). 

3 Morphological Representations 

Methods: We ask whether perturbation distin-guishes two uses of the suffix -er : deverbal (e.g., 

teach vs. teacher ) and comparative (e.g., tall vs. 

taller ). We start with the BATS dataset (Gladkova et al., 2016), which has 50 pairs for both classes, and obtain naturalistic usages by sampling sen-tences from the GPT-BERT Cosmo corpus (Char-pentier and Samuel 2024; accessed via Hugging-Face, Wolf et al. 2019). We create remappings for perturbation and evaluation by removing the -er 

suffix: For example: The man was taller than the boy [taller → tall]. 

Results: We report results for RoBERTa-large on 98 sentences. We find (Fig 1A) that in untrained models, transfer occurs only due to shared tokens; 2

By contrast, in trained models (Fig 1B), transfer is instead dominated by class membership, as is clear in aggregate (Fig 1C). Representations from RoBERTa-large give clusterability of 0.89; rep-resentations at random initialization give cluster-ability of 0.52, which is close to chance, as ex-pected. Perturbation thus qualitatively shows the emergence of a clear deverbal-comparative distinc-tion during training. In B.5, we also report results for RoBERTa-base, ModernBERT, and GPT-BERT, which behave similarly, though we note that GPT-BERT exhibits notably smaller average transfer for deverbal-deverbal, which may agree with prior work in humans and models that the derivational morphologies like the deverbal (verb to noun) may be harder to generalize than inflectional ones (Glad-kova et al., 2016; Pacton and Peereman, 2023). We test this effect quantitatively using linear re-gression with three factors: class has three lev-els: within-class comparative, within-class dever-bal, and between-class; trained is true or false; 

tokenization has four levels: single-single (the crit-ical regions of both the perturbation and evalu-ation are singly-tokenized), single-multi (one of                      

> 2Vertical patterning is observed in untrained models, indi-cating that, for a given model initialization, some items are more likely to be influenced than others overall. But permuta-tion tests (see B.3) show that this patterning is unpredictable across random initializations.
> Model Perturb (trained)
> Perturb (un-trained)
> Cos Best layer
> Cos Last layer
> ModernBERT-B 0.829 0.556 0.755 0.738 ModernBERT-L 0.871 0.553 0.801 0.769 RoBERTa-B 0.811 0.502 0.798 0.759 RoBERTa-L 0.845 0.515 0.889 0.816 GPT-BERT 0.692 0.563 0.713 0.693 Table 1: Average AUC clusterability in Lexical Representa-tions task over all 20 words from CWSD.

the critical regions is singly-tokenized and one is multi-token), multi-different (both regions are multitoken with differing final tokens), and multi-same (both regions are multitoken with the same final token). We perform post-estimation using the 

marginal-effects package (Arel-Bundock et al., 2024). The response variable is the cell values (log-odds ratio) from the matrices in Fig 1A-B, omitting the diagonal and symmetrizing by averaging the two interactions for each pair (9,506 observations). We find that trained models show significant within-class transfer (1.73, p < 0.001 ) and min-imal between-class transfer (0.003, p = 0.97 ;diff=1.72, p < 0.001 ). By contrast, untrained mod-els show comparatively weaker within class trans-fer (0.56, p < 0.001 ) and stronger between-class transfer (0.75, p < 0.001 ). The interaction be-tween class and training is significant: within class transfer is larger in trained than untrained models (diff=1.17, p < 0.001 ); and between-class transfer is smaller (diff=-0.75, p < 0.001 ). Moreover, the significant transfer both within and between classes in untrained models is driven by shared tokeniza-tion: average transfer when a token is shared is 2.6 for within-class and 3.3 for between-class transfer, whereas when there is no shared token, these values drop to -0.12 and -0.08 respectively (both differ-ences are significant, p < 0.001 ). By contrast, for trained models, although some tokenization effects persist, average between-class transfer with shared tokenization is only 0.04 (diff vs. untrained=-3.2, 

p < 0.001 ), showing that, over the course of train-ing, RoBERTa learns to ignore superficially shared tokens and prioritize the representation of the word as a whole. See B.2 for full results of the linear model. 

4 Lexical Representations 

Methods: We ask whether perturbation reveals latent distinctions between different senses for the same word string (word sense disambiguation, WSD), using the CoarseWSD-20 dataset (CWSD; 4Sing. -er -X Sing. -er -der -ier -ier -lier -rier -r -X Deverbal Comparative 

> −3
> −2
> −10123

ASing. -er -X Sing. -er -der -ier -ier -lier -rier -r -X Deverbal Comparative  

> −3
> −2
> −10123

BDeverbal Comp  

> −4
> −202468
> log-odds
> Deverbal Comp

C

Figure 1: A, B: Transfer for Morphology task in RoBERTa-large. A is randomly initialized; B is the trained model. Cell i, j corresponds to finetuning on the ith remapping and evaluating on the jth . Items are grouped hierarchically by morphological class (outer, deverbal vs. comparative) and tokenization (inner, e.g., Sing. means singly tokenized, 

-er means the final token is -er , etc.). C: Distribution of transfer effects (log-odds) to deverbal (magenta) vs. comparative (cyan) depending on which class is perturbed ( x-axis), with the median indicated in each distribution. 1

> 2
> 3
> 4
> perturb
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> cosine
> 0
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> 12
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0

Figure 2: Similarity matrices for square (WSD) us-ing perturbation (left) and cosine (right). Block struc-ture corresponds to four senses: shape, company, town square, numerical square (e.g., 4,9). AUCs: 0.94, 0.87 

Loureiro et al. 2021). CWSD is a course-grained, naturalistic dataset drawn from Wikipedia with 20 nouns, each with two to five distinct senses as la-beled by expert annotators. In general, the intended sense for each word in this dataset is strongly in-dicated by the sentential context. In all cases, we perturb the word of interest to the nonce token glam 

(e.g., He is eating an apple [apple → glam]). As shown in C.2, other nonce tokens yield qualitatively similar results. Recent work by Teglia et al. (2025) found that the cosine similarity of contextualized word embeddings (especially intermediate layers) in MLMs reliably distinguished word senses. Al-though this result aligns with linguistic expecta-tions (e.g., Reif et al., 2019), cosine similarity is correlational and thus cannot establish a causal ef-fect of putative word sense representations (see In-troduction); other concerns also exist (Ethayarajh, 2019; Timkey and van Schijndel, 2021; Zhou et al., 2022; Steck et al., 2024). We adopt the Teglia et al. approach to WSD as a correlational baseline against which to compare our causal perturbation method. Because this baseline requires layer se-lection, we consider two approaches: last layer and best layer. Best-layer uses the best-performing layer for each word; it is an oracle steel-man that al-lows the baseline to “peek” at its own performance, resulting in a conservative comparison. Our design provides two measures of similarity (correlational cosine distance vs. causal perturba-tion transfer). For each of the 20 words in the dataset, we sample 100 examples equally balanced over the senses for that word (see C.1). The simi-larity measures are evaluated against ground-truth word sense labels using the clusterability technique introduced in §2.2; we compute clusterability for each word and then average over all words. 

Results: Figure 2 provides example ModernBERT-L similarity matrices for senses of 

square using perturbation and cosine similarity. Exhaustive visualizations, including for untrained models, are given in C.3. As shown, both methods convergently reveal that latent word senses exert a strong influence on model representations, but this influence tends to be more pronounced under perturbation, suggesting that the causal influence of word sense representations in LMs may be even larger than the correlational impression given by state similarities. We evaluate this impression quantitatively in Table 1, where perturbation clusterability is higher than the oracle best-layer clusterability in three of five models. Our results therefore converge with the Teglia et al. finding that LMs represent word senses, while also grounding this conclusion directly in causal effects on model learning. 

5 Syntactic Representations 

Methods: We turn finally to LM representations of syntax via filler-gap (FG) constructions (e.g., Iknow who i the man liked [gap i], where the referent of who is indexed to the referent of a phonologi-5cleft                 

> wh_finite
> wh_nonfinite
> pseudo_cleft
> restricted_rc
> topicalization
> wh_question
> control
> control_lexical
> FG non-FG ctl
> 0
> FG non-FG ctl
> 256
> FG non-FG ctl
> 512
> FG non-FG ctl
> 1000
> FG non-FG ctl
> 2000
> FG non-FG ctl
> 5000
> FG non-FG ctl
> 10000
> FG non-FG ctl
> 143000
> 1
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3

Figure 3: Transfer (aggregated over animacy and embeddedness conditions) from each FG and control to FG, (minimal) non-FG conditions, and controls. FG and non-FG exhibit similar transfer through step 1k, after which transfer to non-FG begins decreasing. Once FG is learned (step 2k-5k), minimal transfer is seen to/from controls. 0 128 256 512 1k 2k 5k 10k 143k       

> Step
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> 1.2
> 1.4
> Avg effect
> fg fg
> fg nonfg
> c-lex fg
> c-num fg
> fg c-lex
> fg c-num
> FG
> FG
> FG
> non-FG
> FG
> ctl
> ctl
> FG
> ctl
> non-FG
> 1.0
> 0.5
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> 2.5
> untrained
> trained

A B

Figure 4: A: Transfer between indicated classes over training. Std errors are too small to be seen. B: Transfer between indicated classes in untrained (magenta) and trained (cyan) models, with medians shown. 

cally null gap in its source position; Ross, 1967). Diverse types of FG constructions exist (e.g., En-glish has wh -questions, relative clauses, clefts and pseudoclefts, among others), and linguists debate the degree of shared representation between them (e.g., Ross, 1967; Chomsky, 1986; Culicover, 1999; Levine and Hukari, 2006). Thus, unlike coarse-grained word senses that enjoy relatively strong consensus, the expected representation of FG con-structions in English is an open question, one which perturbation allows us to study through the vehicle of LMs. Recently, Boguraev et al. (2025) showed that DAS finds representational transfer in LMs across diverse filler-gap constructions. But given open concerns about DAS (i.e., the risk of reifying researcher assumptions and/or missing nonlinear representations, see Introduction), here we revisit this finding using perturbation. The Boguraev et al. dataset contains seven FG types: two embedded question types ( know vs. 

wonder ), matrix wh -questions, restrictive relatives, clefts, pseudoclefts, and topicalization (see D, Ta-ble A7 for details). For each type, the authors designed pairs of sentences that vary a minimal part of the context with a corresponding change in output (e.g., I know [who, that] the man liked →

[., him] ). These pairs are also varied along two di-mensions: animacy of the extracted element (e.g., Iknow [what, who] the man saw ) and embeddedness 

of the extraction site (e.g., I know who [the nurse said that] the man liked ). When studied using DAS, the design above ostensibly measures sensitivity to relatedness between FG constructions; it does not measure selectivity to FG over non-FG construc-tions. To address this, Boguraev et al. added two control conditions to serve as foils: (a) an agree-ment control ( ctrl-agr ) that manipulates subject-verb agreement ( The [boy, boys] the man liked →

[is, are] ) and (b) a transitivity control ( ctrl-trans )that manipulates the transitivity of the verb ( That man [ran, liked] → [., him] ). This dataset provides natural remappings for per-turbation and evaluation. For example, we can per-turb on I know who the man liked . [. → him] and evaluate transfer on Who the man liked was [was 

→ it]. Conceptually, this allows us to trace cor-ruptions of the model’s native filler-gap representa-tions. However, perturbation offers a key advantage over DAS for this benchmark: whereas DAS needs both the FG and non-FG condition (e.g., I know 

that the man liked [., him] ) to train its intervention, perturbation needs only the FG condition. Thus with perturbation, we can use the minimal non-FG condition as a control that is maximally similar to the FG condition. We consider non-FG a much stronger control than ctrl-agr and ctrl-trans used by Boguraev et al., and while we report transfer to ctrl-agr and ctrl-trans , we focus on the minimal non-FG controls in our interpretation of results. We also make our train and evaluation mappings disjoint with respect to label: all evaluation remappings have critical regions that differ from the critical re-gions of the perturbation remapping thus enabling a more conservative test of transfer than the one used by Boguraev et al. (which does not have the same disjointness property). The different FG conditions differ not only in construction type but also in which words can sen-sibly occupy the critical region. For example, the embedded question conditions might contrast punc-tuation with a pronoun, whereas pseudoclefts might contrast a verb with a pronoun (see Table A7). Sim-ilarity of causal transfer (using either DAS or per-6turbation) will plausibly be influenced by similarity (both exact lexical or, e.g., part of speech) of eval-uation targets, in addition to the influence of any abstractions they might share (like FG). We sub-stantiate this concern in D.2, where we show that there are large differences in critical region similar-ity (CRS)—the degree of lexical overlap between possible completions (critical regions) for different pairs of FG conditions in the dataset created by Boguraev et al.. DAS cannot directly control for this confound, which creates a previously undocu-mented interpretational problem for their results. 3

For example, ctrl-agr has almost no CRS with any FG condition (Figure A2), so it is an anticonserva-tive control. By contrast, we can and do control for this confound using perturbation, simply by subtracting out the transfer to the minimal non-FG control mentioned above (which has maximally similar context and evaluates against identical crit-ical regions). This yields a tightly controlled esti-mate of the portion of perturbation transfer that is selectively driven by FG, over and above superfi-cial contextual and lexical similarities. Henceforth we refer to this controlled estimate (i.e., the pair-wise difference between transfer in FG →FG and FG →non-FG), because it subtracts out the baseline transfer rate. 

Results: Perturbation transfer across Pythia 1.4B training checkpoints is shown in Figure 3 from each FG condition and from the Boguraev et al. control conditions (rows) to (i) other FG condi-tions (left columns), (ii) minimal non-FG condi-tion (middle columns), and (iii) ctrl-agr and ctrl-trans (right columns), aggregating for simplicity across the animacy and embeddedness conditions. 

baselined-transfer is obtained by subtracting the non-FG block from the FG block. We provide unaggregated and baselined-transfer versions in Figure A7. As shown, the model initially shows lit-tle between-condition transfer (step 0), but quickly acquires transfer primarily as a function of CRS. For example, at step 512, transfer is highly simi-lar between the FG and non-FG conditions, with especially strong transfer between the restrictive relative and pseudocleft conditions, which have common targets (D.2, Figure A2). By step 2k, how-ever, we see the model begin to distinguish FG 

> 3Note that exact lexical match between training and evalu-ation completions may also pose a problem, since Boguraev et al. did not use disjoint targets when training DAS. Given that DAS can cause models to output arbitrary targets (Wu et al., 2023; Arora et al., 2024) this may further confound their results. Our evaluation eliminates this issue.

from the minimal non-FG controls, and transfer is much stronger to FG over non-FG conditions by the end of training. Fig 4A supports this gen-eral impression by showing aggregate transfer over the course of training: FG perturbations transfer roughly equally to FG and non-FG until step 512, when they begin to strongly diverge. Models show some transfer to ctrl-trans initially, which peaks around step 512, begins to decrease at step 1k— which is also when the model begins to distinguish FG from non-FG—and mostly vanishes by step 5k. We speculate on causes of this behavior in D.3. Our results reveal not only the structure of representations at specific checkpoints but also the dynamics of their emergence over training, both of which show interpretable patterns that align with linguistic theorizing. We also follow up on Boguraev et al.’s report of minimal transfer between embedded and non-embedded FGs. Our approach is more conserva-tive than theirs (we use fully disjoint training and evaluation sets and intervene unsupervised from a single training example), but we nonetheless find substantial baselined-transfer between the embed-dedness conditions (see D, Figure A7, right column, especially steps 2k, 5k, and 10k, where between-condition structure begins to emerge; statistical tests of significance in Section D.4), suggesting some degree of common representation between FG constructions even when composed with unre-lated constructions (subordinate clauses). In Fig 4B we plot distributions of (unbase-lined) transfer from FG perturbations to three broad classes of examples (other FG conditions, non-FG conditions, and Boguraev et al. controls); as well as from the Boguraev et al. controls to the FG and non-FG conditions. Untrained models show no transfer across the board. Trained models gener-alize FG perturbations most strongly to other FG conditions, with much weaker transfer in the other comparisons (see D.4 for statistical comparisons). In D.5, we briefly discuss gradations in similarity among the individual FG conditions. Finally, as a sanity check, we measure the change in perplexity under FG perturbations on a wikitext sample (10k words; Merity et al. 2017): Pythia-1.4B perplexity changes minimally from 23.58 to 23.60, suggest-ing that perturbation has fairly selective effects and largely preserves overall model function. 76 Discussion 

We developed perturbation as a bottom-up method for studying LM representations, based on the hy-pothesis that representations are conduits for learn-ing (Hinton, 1986; Shepard, 1987). We supported this hypothesis by showing that perturbation re-veals interpretable morphological, lexical, and syn-tactic structure. Perturbation has several advantages over other techniques. First , perturbation is data-driven: it uses only a single unlabeled training example, and we provide no guidance to the model about how we expect it to generalize the perturbation. Per-turbation thus avoids the interpretational pitfalls of supervised interpretability methods like probing and DAS—including the risk of reifying researcher assumptions (see Introduction, Sutter et al. 2025). 

Second , this data-drivenness allows the experi-menter to make inferences not only about whether a model contains a hypothesized representation, but also about how functionally important that repre-sentation is. For example, in the filler-gap analysis, we observe transfer not only along the filler-gap dimension, but also according to animacy and em-beddedness, which were not of direct interest. 

Third , as perturbation makes no geometric as-sumptions, it can recover arbitrary representations (linear or non-linear). 

Fourth , we have shown empirically that, unlike supervised approaches like probing (Hewitt and Liang, 2019) and DAS (Arora et al., 2024), pertur-bation does not find high-level “representations” in untrained models. Selectivity for real over spuri-ous representations has long been a sought-after (and hard-to-achieve) property of interpretability techniques (Hewitt and Liang, 2019; Arora et al., 2024; Sutter et al., 2025), and we find that perturba-tion naturally has this property. Moreover, because perturbation transfer is weak when representations are absent, perturbation can support nuanced in-ferences about the emergence of representations during training, with potential implications both for pretraining design and for studying statistical learning in humans via LM proxies (Warstadt and Bowman, 2022; Frank, 2023). For example, our perturbation-based findings lend new support to claims that usage is sufficient to learn much mor-phological, lexical, and syntactic structure (Gold-berg, 2003; Tomasello, 2005; Bybee, 2006). 

Fifth , perturbation’s simplicity makes it both data- and compute-efficient (A.3), requiring only one training instance per intervention, a small num-ber (5-10) of gradient steps for training, and a sin-gle forward pass per evaluation batch. This con-trasts with supervised approaches like probing and DAS, which require sufficient training data to train additional projections of model states, often at each layer in the model. Perturbation is thus compatible with small naturalistic datasets. 

Sixth , as shown in §5, as perturbation requires only a single remapping, it enables tight experimen-tal controls that are not possible with DAS, which needs the control remapping for training. Lastly, perturbation is a simple and inexpen-sive tool for linguists studying the relatedness of linguistic phenomena (e.g., Goldberg, 1995; Ste-fanowitsch and Gries, 2003; Langacker, 2005; By-bee, 2010; Diessel, 2023). One recently developed method for this purpose is corpus-ablation-based acquisition studies (Misra and Mahowald, 2024; Patil et al., 2024; Leong and Linzen, 2026). Though these methods have been successful, they require meticulous curation of relatively large corpora and potentially days-long retraining of even small LMs. 

7 Conclusion 

We introduced perturbation, a simple, data-driven method for studying representations in language models. Across morphological, lexical, and syn-tactic structures, perturbation systematically re-vealed linguistically interpretable representations that emerge with training. Our work offers an escape from the dilemma faced by supervised methods between being too expressive and not ex-pressive enough, while also converging with and strengthening prior claims that many linguistic ab-stractions can be acquired from distributional evi-dence alone. 

Limitations 

This work has several limitations. First , as dis-cussed ( Methods ), although perturbation is unsu-pervised in the sense that it trains on unlabeled examples, the interpretability of results is only as good as the selection of remappings and controls. As with most interpretability methods, researchers must take care to set up the experiment in ways that will support accurate and useful conclusions. 

Second , we found in some cases that perturba-tion transfer was influenced by tokenization (§3). More work is needed to determine whether this is a limitation of the perturbation method, an in-8trinsic property of LM representations of multiply-tokenized words, or some combination of the two. 

Third , although we tested perturbation on both autoregressive and masked language models, our current implementation does not support perturbing autoregressive models given bidirectional context, limiting the range of representations that can be studied in autoregressive models. For example, we would not be able to reliably study word sense disambiguation in autoregressive models, because disambiguating sense information often follows the ambiguous word. Given the prevalence of autore-gressive models in actual use, future work should focus on addressing this limitation. 

Fourth , we focused for practical reasons exclu-sively on linguistic representations English. Pertur-bation is perfectly amenable to studying representa-tions in other languages as well as representations of nonlinguistic knowledge (e.g., commonsense, social, or situational knowledge). We hope our proposal will support future research along these lines. 

Fifth , unlike approaches like DAS (Geiger et al., 2024) or circuit analysis (Elhage et al., 2021), per-turbation is more useful for finding shared repre-sentations than controllable “mechanisms.” For ex-ample, although perturbation can detect when LMs distinguish different senses of a given word, it does not reveal how the senses are encoded by the model or how to intervene on that encoding in order to steer model behavior. Perturbation may ultimately be useful as an initial guide to identifying steerable mechanisms under weaker geometrical constraints than e.g., DAS, but more work is needed to explore this possibility. 

Sixth , although our work was partially motivated by usage-based theories of grammar, we recog-nize that the recovery of linguistic structure in statistical learners with no innate symbolically-specified grammar (LMs) is not necessarily in-compatible with the existence of innate grammati-cal constraints in humans. Our work instead con-tributes to a growing body of evidence on the feasi-bility of bottom-up statistical learning of linguistic structure, which is one of many dimensions of de-bate on the human capacity for language. 

Acknowledgements 

We are grateful to Emily Goodwin, Jasper Jian, Nathan Roll, Yuhan Zhang, Amir Zur, and other members of the CLiMB Lab at Stanford for com-ments and discussion. We are grateful to Sasha Boguraev for answering questions about their meth-ods and dataset. 

References                    

> Yossi Adi, Einat Kermany, Yonatan Belinkov, Ofer Lavi, and Yoav Goldberg. 2017. Fine-grained analysis of sentence embeddings using auxiliary prediction tasks. In International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Guillaume Alain and Yoshua Bengio. 2017. Under-standing intermediate layers using linear classifier probes. ICLR 2017 Workshop Track. Vincent Arel-Bundock, Noah Greifer, and Andrew Heiss. 2024. How to intrpret statistical models us-ing marginaleffects for R and Python. Journal of Statistical Software , 111(9):1–32. Aryaman Arora, Dan Jurafsky, and Christopher Potts. 2024. CausalGym: Benchmarking causal inter-pretability methods on linguistic tasks. In Proceed-ings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-pers) , pages 14638–14663, Bangkok, Thailand. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Emmon Bach. 1983. On the relationship between word-grammar and phrase-grammar. Nat. Lang. Linguist. Theory , 1(1):65–89. Yonatan Belinkov. 2022. Probing classifiers: Promises, shortcomings, and advances. Computational Linguis-tics , 48(1):207–219. Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle O’Brien, Eric Hallahan, Mo-hammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Edward Raff, Aviya Skowron, Lintang Sutawika, and Oskar Van Der Wal. 2023. Pythia: a suite for analyzing large language models across training and scaling. In Proceedings of the 40th Inter-national Conference on Machine Learning , ICML’23. JMLR.org. Sasha Boguraev, Christopher Potts, and Kyle Mahowald. 2025. Causal interventions reveal shared structure across English filler–gap constructions. In Proceed-ings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 25032–25053, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Joan Bybee. 2006. From Usage to Grammar: The Mind’s Response to Repetition. Language ,82(4):711–733. Joan Bybee. 2010. Language, usage and cognition .Cambridge University Press. Lucas Charpentier, Leshem Choshen, Ryan Cotterell, Mustafa Omer Gul, Michael Y. Hu, Jing Liu, Jaap

9Jumelet, Tal Linzen, Aaron Mueller, Candance Ross, Raj Sanjay Shah, Alex Warstadt, Ethan Gotlieb Wilcox, and Adina Williams. 2025. Findings of the third BabyLM challenge: Accelerating language modeling research with cognitively plausible data. In 

Proceedings of the First BabyLM Workshop , pages 399–420, Suzhou, China. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Lucas Georges Gabriel Charpentier and David Samuel. 2024. GPT or BERT: why not both? In The 2nd BabyLM Challenge at the 28th Conference on Com-putational Natural Language Learning , pages 262– 283, Miami, FL, USA. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Noam Chomsky. 1986. Barriers . The MIT Press, Mas-sachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge. Alexis Conneau, German Kruszewski, Guillaume Lam-ple, Loïc Barrault, and Marco Baroni. 2018. What you can cram into a single $&!#* vector: Probing sentence embeddings for linguistic properties. In 

Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2126–2136, Melbourne, Aus-tralia. Association for Computational Linguistics. Róbert Csordás, Christopher Potts, Christopher D Man-ning, and Atticus Geiger. 2024. Recurrent neural networks learn to store and generate sequences us-ing non-linear representations. In Proceedings of the 7th BlackboxNLP Workshop: Analyzing and Inter-preting Neural Networks for NLP , pages 248–262, Miami, Florida, US. Association for Computational Linguistics. Peter W Culicover. 1999. Syntactic Nuts: Hard Cases, Syntactic Theory, and Language Acquisition . Oxford University Press, London, England. Pablo J Diego Simon, Stéphane d’Ascoli, Emmanuel Chemla, Yair Lakretz, and Jean-Rémi King. 2024. A polar coordinate system represents syntax in large language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:105375–105396. Holger Diessel. 2023. The constructicon: Taxonomies and networks . Cambridge University Press. Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Nicholas Schiefer, Tom Henighan, Shauna Kravec, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Robert Lasenby, Dawn Drain, Carol Chen, Roger Grosse, Sam McCandlish, Jared Kaplan, Dario Amodei, Martin Wattenberg, and Christopher Olah. 2022. Toy models of super-position. https://transformer-circuits.pub/ 2022/toy_model/index.html . Accessed: –. Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse, and 6 others. 2021. A mathematical framework for transformer circuits. https://transformer-circuits.pub/ 2021/framework/index.html . Accessed: 2026-3-4. Jeffrey L Elman. 1990. Finding structure in time. Cog-nitive science , 14(2):179–211. Joshua Engels, Eric J Michaud, Isaac Liao, Wes Gurnee, and Max Tegmark. 2025. Not all language model fea-tures are one-dimensionally linear. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Kawin Ethayarajh. 2019. How contextual are contextu-alized word representations? Comparing the geom-etry of BERT, ELMo, and GPT-2 embeddings. In 

Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-guage Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 55–65, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Michael C Frank. 2023. Bridging the data gap between children and large language models. Trends in Cog-nitive Sciences .Richard Futrell and Kyle Mahowald. 2025. How linguis-tics learned to stop worrying and love the language models. Behavioral and Brain Sciences , page 1–98. Jon Gauthier, Jennifer Hu, Ethan Wilcox, Peng Qian, and Roger Levy. 2020. SyntaxGym: An online plat-form for targeted evaluation of language models. In 

Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics: System Demon-strations , pages 70–76, Online. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Atticus Geiger, Duligur Ibeling, Amir Zur, Maheep Chaudhary, Sonakshi Chauhan, Jing Huang, Arya-man Arora, Zhengxuan Wu, Noah Goodman, Christo-pher Potts, and 1 others. 2025. Causal abstraction: A theoretical foundation for mechanistic interpretability. 

Journal of Machine Learning Research , 26(83):1–64. Atticus Geiger, Zhengxuan Wu, Hanson Lu, Josh Rozner, Elisa Kreiss, Thomas Icard, Noah Good-man, and Christopher Potts. 2022. Inducing causal structure for interpretable neural networks. In In-ternational Conference on Machine Learning , pages 7324–7338. PMLR. Atticus Geiger, Zhengxuan Wu, Christopher Potts, Thomas Icard, and Noah Goodman. 2024. Finding alignments between interpretable causal variables and distributed neural representations. In Causal Learning and Reasoning , pages 160–187. PMLR. Anna Gladkova, Aleksandr Drozd, and Satoshi Mat-suoka. 2016. Analogy-based detection of morpholog-ical and semantic relations with word embeddings: what works and what doesn’t. In Proceedings of the NAACL Student Research Workshop , pages 8–15, San Diego, California. Association for Computational Linguistics. 

10 E Mark Gold. 1967. Language identification in the limit. 

Information and control , 10(5):447–474. Adele E Goldberg. 1995. Constructions: A construction grammar approach to argument structure. Chicago UP .Adele E Goldberg. 2003. Constructions: A new the-oretical approach to language. Trends in cognitive sciences , 7(5):219–224. Satchel Grant, Simon Jerome Han, Alexa R. Tartaglini, and Christopher Potts. 2025. Addressing divergent representations from causal interventions on neural networks. Preprint , arXiv:2511.04638. John Hewitt and Percy Liang. 2019. Designing and in-terpreting probes with control tasks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-ural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 2733–2743, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. John Hewitt and Christopher D. Manning. 2019. Astructural probe for finding syntax in word represen-tations. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 4129–4138, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computational Linguistics. Geoffrey E Hinton. 1986. Learning distributed repre-sentations of concepts. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society , volume 8. Jennifer Hu, Kyle Mahowald, Gary Lupyan, Anna Ivanova, and Roger Levy. 2024a. Language mod-els align with human judgments on key grammatical constructions. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 121(36):e2400917121. Michael Y. Hu, Aaron Mueller, Candace Ross, Ad-ina Williams, Tal Linzen, Chengxu Zhuang, Ryan Cotterell, Leshem Choshen, Alex Warstadt, and Ethan Gotlieb Wilcox. 2024b. Findings of the sec-ond BabyLM challenge: Sample-efficient pretraining on developmentally plausible corpora. In The 2nd BabyLM Challenge at the 28th Conference on Com-putational Natural Language Learning , pages 1–21, Miami, FL, USA. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Carina Kauf and Anna Ivanova. 2023. A better way to do masked language model scoring. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) ,pages 925–935, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Najoung Kim and Paul Smolensky. 2021. Testing for grammatical category abstraction in neural language models. In Proceedings of the Society for Compu-tation in Linguistics 2021 , pages 467–470, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2014. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 .Ronald W Langacker. 2005. Construction grammars: Cognitive, radical, and less so. Cognitive linguistics: Internal dynamics and interdisciplinary interaction ,32:101–159. Cara Su-Yi Leong and Tal Linzen. 2026. Manipulating language models’ training data to study syntactic constraint learning: The case of english passivization. 

Journal of Memory and Language , 149:104751. R Levine and T E Hukari. 2006. The unity of unbounded dependency constructions . Center for the Study of Language and Information, Stanford. Tal Linzen, Emmanuel Dupoux, and Yoav Goldberg. 2016. Assessing the ability of LSTMs to learn syntax-sensitive dependencies. Transactions of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics , 4:521–535. Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019. RoBERTa: A robustly optimized bert pretraining ap-proach. Preprint , arXiv:1907.11692. Daniel Loureiro, Kiamehr Rezaee, Mohammad Taher Pilehvar, and Jose Camacho-Collados. 2021. Anal-ysis and evaluation of language models for word sense disambiguation. Computational Linguistics ,47(2):387–443. Aleksandar Makelov, Georg Lange, Atticus Geiger, and Neel Nanda. 2024. Is this the subspace you are look-ing for? an interpretability illusion for subspace acti-vation patching. In The Twelfth International Confer-ence on Learning Representations .Alec Marantz and Morris Halle. 1993. Distributed morphology and the pieces of inflection. In Ken-neth Locke Hale and Samuel Jay Keyser, editors, 

The View from Building 20: Essays in Linguistics in Honor of Sylvain Bromberger , pages 112–176. MIT Press, Cambridge. R. Thomas McCoy, Tal Linzen, Ewan Dunbar, and Paul Smolensky. 2019. RNNs implicitly implement tensor-product representations. In International Con-ference on Learning Representations .Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and Richard Socher. 2017. Pointer sentinel mixture mod-els. In International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations .Tomáš Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor-rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed representa-tions of words and phrases and their compositionality. 

Advances in neural information processing systems ,26. Raphaël Millière. 2024. Language models as models of language. Preprint , arXiv:2408.07144. 

11 Kanishka Misra. 2022. minicons: Enabling flexible be-havioral and representational analyses of transformer language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.13112 .Kanishka Misra and Najoung Kim. 2023. Abstrac-tion via exemplars? a representational case study on lexical category inference in bert. Preprint ,arXiv:2312.03708. Kanishka Misra and Kyle Mahowald. 2024. Language models learn rare phenomena from less rare phenom-ena: The case of the missing AANNs. In Proceed-ings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 913–929, Mi-ami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Neel Nanda, Andrew Lee, and Martin Wattenberg. 2023. Emergent linear representations in world models of self-supervised sequence models. In Proceedings of the 6th BlackboxNLP Workshop: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP , pages 16–30, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Sébastien Pacton and Ronald Peereman. 2023. Mor-phology as an aid in orthographic learning of new words: The influence of inflected and derived forms in spelling acquisition. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 232:105675. Kiho Park, Yo Joong Choe, and Victor Veitch. 2024. The linear representation hypothesis and the geome-try of large language models. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning ,pages 39643–39666. Abhinav Patil, Jaap Jumelet, Yu Ying Chiu, Andy La-pastora, Peter Shen, Lexie Wang, Clevis Willrich, and Shane Steinert-Threlkeld. 2024. Filtered corpus training (FiCT) shows that language models can gen-eralize from indirect evidence. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 12:1597– 1615. F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duch-esnay. 2011. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,12:2825–2830. Tiago Pimentel, Josef Valvoda, Rowan Hall Maudslay, Ran Zmigrod, Adina Williams, and Ryan Cotterell. 2020. Information-theoretic probing for linguistic structure. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,pages 4609–4622, Online. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Emily Reif, Ann Yuan, Martin Wattenberg, Fernanda B Viegas, Andy Coenen, Adam Pearce, and Been Kim. 2019. Visualizing and measuring the geometry of bert. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32. Anna Rogers, Olga Kovaleva, and Anna Rumshisky. 2020. A primer in BERTology: What we know about how BERT works. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 8:842–866. John Robert Ross. 1967. Constraints on variables in syntax . Ph.D. thesis, MIT. Joshua Rozner, Leonie Weissweiler, Kyle Mahowald, and Cory Shain. 2025a. Constructions are revealed in word distributions. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pages 2116–2138, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Joshua Rozner, Leonie Weissweiler, and Cory Shain. 2025b. BabyLM’s first constructions: Causal inter-ventions provide a signal of learning. In Proceed-ings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 2237–2249, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Ivan A Sag. 2010. English filler-gap constructions. Lan-guage , pages 486–545. Naomi Saphra and Sarah Wiegreffe. 2024. Mechanistic? In Proceedings of the 7th BlackboxNLP Workshop: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP ,pages 480–498, Miami, Florida, US. Association for Computational Linguistics. Roger N Shepard. 1987. Toward a universal law of generalization for psychological science. Science ,237(4820):1317–1323. Paul Smolensky. 1990. Tensor product variable bind-ing and the representation of symbolic structures in connectionist systems. Artificial intelligence , 46(1-2):159–216. Publisher: Elsevier. Karolina Stanczak, Edoardo Ponti, Lucas Torroba Hen-nigen, Ryan Cotterell, and Isabelle Augenstein. 2022. Same neurons, different languages: Probing mor-phosyntax in multilingual pre-trained models. In 

Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies ,pages 1589–1598, Seattle, United States. Association for Computational Linguistics. Harald Steck, Chaitanya Ekanadham, and Nathan Kallus. 2024. Is cosine-similarity of embeddings really about similarity? In Companion Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2024 , pages 887–890. Anatol Stefanowitsch and Stefan Th. Gries. 2003. Col-lostructions: Investigating the interaction of words and constructions. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics , 8(2):209–243. Denis Sutter, Julian Minder, Thomas Hofmann, and Tiago Pimentel. 2025. The non-linear representation dilemma: Is causal abstraction enough for mecha-nistic interpretability? In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-tems .

12 Simone Teglia, Simone Tedeschi, and Roberto Navigli. 2025. How much do encoder models know about word senses? In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2266–2277, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Adly Templeton, Tom Conerly, Jonathan Marcus, Jack Lindsey, Trenton Bricken, Brian Chen, Adam Pearce, Craig Citro, Emmanuel Ameisen, Andy Jones, Hoagy Cunningham, Nicholas L Turner, Callum McDougall, Monte MacDiarmid, Alex Tamkin, Esin Durmus, Tristan Hume, Francesco Mosconi, C Daniel Free-man, and 7 others. 2024. Scaling monosemanticity: Extracting interpretable features from claude 3 son-net. https://transformer-circuits.pub/2024/ scaling-monosemanticity/ . Accessed: 2026-3-4. Joshua B Tenenbaum, Charles Kemp, Thomas L Grif-fiths, and Noah D Goodman. 2011. How to grow a mind: statistics, structure, and abstraction. Science ,331(6022):1279–1285. Ian Tenney, Dipanjan Das, and Ellie Pavlick. 2019. BERT rediscovers the classical NLP pipeline. In 

Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics , pages 4593– 4601, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics. William Timkey and Marten van Schijndel. 2021. All bark and no bite: Rogue dimensions in transformer language models obscure representational quality. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empiri-cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 4527–4546, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Re-public. Association for Computational Linguistics. Michael Tomasello. 2005. Constructing a language: A usage-based theory of language acquisition . Harvard university press. Mycal Tucker, Peng Qian, and Roger Levy. 2021. What if this modified that? syntactic interventions with counterfactual embeddings. In Findings of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021 , pages 862–875, Online. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Benjamin Warner, Antoine Chaffin, Benjamin Clavié, Orion Weller, Oskar Hallström, Said Taghadouini, Alexis Gallagher, Raja Biswas, Faisal Ladhak, Tom Aarsen, Griffin Thomas Adams, Jeremy Howard, and Iacopo Poli. 2025. Smarter, better, faster, longer: A modern bidirectional encoder for fast, memory efficient, and long context finetuning and inference. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2526–2547, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Alex Warstadt and Samuel R Bowman. 2022. What artificial neural networks can tell us about human lan-guage acquisition. In Algebraic structures in natural language , pages 17–60. CRC Press. Alex Warstadt, Aaron Mueller, Leshem Choshen, Ethan Wilcox, Chengxu Zhuang, Juan Ciro, Rafael Mos-quera, Bhargavi Paranjabe, Adina Williams, Tal Linzen, and Ryan Cotterell. 2023. Findings of the BabyLM challenge: Sample-efficient pretraining on developmentally plausible corpora. In Proceedings of the BabyLM Challenge at the 27th Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning , pages 1–34, Singapore. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Jennifer C. White, Tiago Pimentel, Naomi Saphra, and Ryan Cotterell. 2021. A non-linear structural probe. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies ,pages 132–138, Online. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pier-ric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, and Jamie Brew. 2019. Huggingface’s transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. CoRR ,abs/1910.03771. Zhengxuan Wu, Atticus Geiger, Thomas Icard, Christo-pher Potts, and Noah Goodman. 2023. Interpretabil-ity at scale: Identifying causal mechanisms in alpaca. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Kaitlyn Zhou, Kawin Ethayarajh, Dallas Card, and Dan Jurafsky. 2022. Problems with cosine as a measure of embedding similarity for high frequency words. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) , pages 401–423, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics. 

A Supplement: Methods 

A.1 Models 

We use GPT-BERT as our BabyLM because it was the best-performing model in the 2024 BabyLM challenge (Hu et al., 2024b) and is an MLM. We use the version of it that was used as a baseline in the 2025 BabyLM challenge (Charpentier et al., 2025). 4 Other models (RoBERTa, ModernBERT, and Pythia) are also obtained from Huggingface. For GPT-BERT, RoBERTa and ModernBERT, we use Huggingface’s from_config method to obtain a randomly initialized version of the model. For the untrained Pythia model, we use the untrained step 0 checkpoint.    

> 4Accessed via HuggingFace: https: //huggingface.co/BabyLM-community/ babylm-baseline-100m-gpt-bert-mixed

13 A.2 Hyperparameter selection 

As each model has a slightly different size and structure, we tune perturbation parameters (learn-ing rate and number of steps) against AUC cluster-ability (see 2.2, A.4; either separating the linguistic classes of interest, or distinguishing a control class) using a separate training set before conducting final evaluation on a held-out test set. (For Lexical Rep-resentations and Filler Gap, train-test splits were provided by the existing benchmarks. For Morphol-ogy, we create the separate sets via separate sam-ples of the Cosmo Corpus.) Details of the classes and controls are provided in each experiment sec-tion and final hyperparameter choices are in each experiment section’s corresponding Appendix. Though we use separate train and test sets to make sure that we do not tune the perturbation pa-rameters to the train set, performance across train-ing and test sets is similar and there is no evidence that, in optimizing steps and learning rate, pertur-bation “learns the train set.” For example, for mor-phology, RoBERTa-large has AUC 0.898 on the training set and 0.889 on the test set. ModernBERT-large has AUC 0.858 on training and 0.871 on test. In the hyperparameter search, we observe that perturbation achieves high clusterability on trained models at a variety of learning rates and gradient steps. Unsurprisingly, high learning rates or too many steps can collapse model behavior; lower learning rates produce smaller effects. In Section 5: Syntactic Representations we report how much model perplexity changes after perturbation on the filler-gap syntax task. Unsurprisingly, during hyper-parameter tuning on the filler-gap syntax task, we observe that higher learning rates and more gradi-ent steps raise perplexity more than lower learning rates and fewer steps. 

A.3 Cost of perturbation training and evaluation 

Perturbation is relatively inexpensive to run. For example, for Section 5: Syntactic Representations, we can run a full experiment on a Pythia-1.4B checkpoint in 15 minutes on a single Nvidia RTX A6000. This produces 145k observations: 5 sep-arate training perturbations of each of 34 classes (170 perturbations), with each evaluated on 25 ex-amples from each class (150 data points per square in the similarity matrices produced in Figure A7). For comparison, Boguraev et al. (2025) report that for one model checkpoint, training and evalua-tion on two Nvidia A40 GPUs required 262 hours. Our entire FG analysis (which tested 13 model checkpoints on both FG and the non-FG control) took 15 × 13 × 2 = 7hrs. 

A.4 Clusterability AUC 

As noted in Section 2.2: Experimental Design, we use a generic notion of clusterability for evaluation, which measures the degree to which similarities are higher within vs. between classes as an area under the curve. Specifically, we compute an n × n

perturbation transfer matrix (i.e., a perturbation-based similarity matrix) across all examples in the dataset, where the value at cell i, j is the log odds-ratio R when the model is evaluated on remapping 

j after being perturbed (i.e., trained) using remap-ping i. We treat these scores as a classifier signal for “same cluster” and compute the area under the curve (AUC) of the receiver operating character-istic against a label matrix L where Li,j = 1 iff i

and j are of the same class, and zero otherwise. 5 In this setting, a higher AUC indicates that same-class items tend to have higher similarity scores than different-class items. Clusterability has the bene-fit that it produces a deterministic value that does not depend on the choice of a particular clustering technique or seed. 

B Supplement for Section 3: Morphological Representations 

B.1 Methods 

As described in Section 3: Morphological Representations, we evaluate on a test set of 98 examples (one each of the 2 × 50 = 100 -er words, except for two words which were not found in the BabyLM Cosmo corpus). Hyperparameters (learn-ing rate and number of epochs) were tuned on sepa-rate data for training to maximize AUC clusterabil-ity across the two classes. Hyperparameters for all models tested are given in B.5. When computing AUC clusterability for mor-phology, we do not symmetrize the matrix. 

B.2 Linear model 

Marginal effects are computed with the 

marginal-effects package (Arel-Bundock et al., 2024) using balanced factor weights. Table A1 gives average effects across the three   

> 5We use scikit (Pedregosa et al., 2011). As the distribution of classes in the dataset is not always balanced we compute AUC with reweighting, so that the distribution within both the positive and negative label sets is equal across classes.

14 trained class tokenization effect p-val                                                                           

> multi-diff −0.10 ±0.03 0.003
> multi-same 3.3 ±0.2<0.001
> single-multi −0.06 ±0.02 0.009
> single-single −0.09 ±0.05 0.04
> multi-diff −0.17 ±0.06 0.05
> multi-same 2.6 ±0.2<0.001
> single-multi −0.10 ±0.04 0.03
> single-single −0.10 ±0.08 0.02
> multi-diff 0.03 ±0.03 0.03
> multi-same 0.04 ±0.20.09
> single-multi −0.14 ±0.02 <0.001
> single-single 0.08 ±0.05 0.06
> multi-diff 0.95 ±0.06 <0.001
> multi-same 1.3 ±0.2<0.001
> single-multi 1.34 ±0.04 <0.001
> single-single 3.32 ±0.08 <0.001
> false
> between class
> within class
> true
> between class
> within class
> Table A1: Morphology Linear Model Summary: Average ef-fects by all three factors. Average effects greater than 0.1 are bolded. As discussed in §3, untrained models show mean-ingful transfer only in the multi-same (shared token) setting. Trained models show meaningful transfer only to items of the same class. In trained models single-single transfer is signif-icantly higher than other tokenization settings (discussed in B.4).
> trained untrained diff
> within class 1.73 (p < 0.001 )0.56 (p < 0.001 )1.17 (p < 0.001 )between class 0.003 (p= 0 .97 )0.75 (p < 0.001 )-0.75 (p < 0.001 )Table A2: Marginal effects by class and training status. (Note: since we use balanced factor weights, these correspond to the average of the corresponding values in Table A1.) Trained models show transfer only within class. Untrained models show some transfer both within and between classes, but this is because the average includes pairs with shared tokens (see Table A3).

factors tested in the linear model in §3 (though it omits for clarity the distinction between same-class-comparative and same-class-deverbal). Table A2 and Table A3 give average effects for the aggregations discussed in that section. 

B.3 Vertical patterning in untrained models 

We verify that vertical patterning in the untrained model is random. We initialize a HuggingFace RoBERTa-large model with seven different seeds. We compute the transfer matrix on the common training dataset for all of these models. We look for linear dependence in the transfer matrix structure (i.e. consistent vertical pattern-ing across initializations) using a permutation test. We consider the first 33 × 33 block of each matrix (this is the portion of the matrix before any shared tokens). We first compute the average observed Pearson correlation coefficient (on flattened matri-               

> trained untrained
> within class 1.3 2.6
> between class 0.04 (p= 0 .9)3.3
> within class 1.87 -0.12
> between class -0.01 (p= 0 .6)-0.08
> Shared token
> No shared token
> Table A3: Marginal effects by whether there is a shared token (i.e., multi-same is True). This table can be computed from Table A1, with averaging in the case of within-class (deverbal and comparative) and no-shared-token (average of the three values for the tokenization factor that are not multi-same). Untrained models show transfer (both within and between classes) only when there is a shared token. Trained models show similar transfer effect regardless of whether there is a shared token. In trained models, effect size with no shared token (1.87) is higher than shared token (1.3) because the single-single tokenization setting has higher transfer than all multi-token settings. P-values are <0.001 except where indicated.

ces with diagonal excluded) over all pairs of the 7 transfer matrices (21 unique pairs). We test under column permutation and also full matrix permutation. For column permutation, we construct a null distribution by computing the same statistic (i.e. average of correlation coefficient over 21 matrix pairs) under n=10,000 random permu-tations of the matrix columns, which results in a p-value of 0.720 (i.e., the permuted matrices pro-duce a statistic larger than the observed statistic in 72% of trials). For the full matrix permutation, we do the same but randomly permute the entire matrix (we flat-ten, shuffle, and then unflatten). Under n=10,000 random permutations of the matrices, we obtain a p-value of 0.725. We thus fail to find evidence of systematic patterning in the transfer to particular items when there are no shared tokens. 

B.4 Additional findings from the morphology analysis Multi-token effects In trained models, within-class pairs show significantly higher transfer when both are singly-tokenized: single-single (3.32) vs. multi-diff (0.95; diff = 2.37, p < 0.001 ; see Ta-ble A1). This suggests either that our approach to perturbation does not work as well in the multi-token setting, or that shared representations are weaker in multitoken words. 

Mediators of transfer (i.e. ablations) As per-turbation enables us to easily alter aspects of the context or critical region remappings, we further investigate the extent to which generalization is mediated by different aspects of the remappings 15 perturbation setting AUC-all AUC-single AUC-multi eff diff (single) eff diff (multi)                                                            

> normal (+ tall, - taller) 0.889 0.981 0.796 3.24 ±0.08 (p < 0.001)
> 1.3±0.3(p < 0.001)
> no contrastive (+ tall) 0.831 0.963 0.755 1.96 ±0.08 (p < 0.001)
> 1.0±0.3(p < 0.001)
> no context (+ tall, - taller) 0.792 0.995 0.681 12 .1±0.4(p < 0.001)
> 2.9±1.4(p= 0 .045)
> common target (blue) (+ blue, - taller) 0.767 0.836 0.738 2.6±0.1(p < 0.001)
> 1.6±0.5(p < 0.001)
> common target (blue) no contrastive (+ blue)
> 0.743 0.782 0.717 1.9±0.1(p < 0.001)
> 1.7±0.5(p < 0.001)
> -eze morpheme (+talleze, - taller) 0.709 0.794 0.665 1.2±0.7(p < 0.001)
> 0.5±0.2(p= 0 .022)
> Table A4: Results under various changes to the train and eval remappings on RoBERTa-large. Row 1 reproduces the result presented in the main text, for comparison. AUC-single and AUC-multi give clusterability of the subset of words that are singly or multi-tokenized. Eff diff give the difference in effect in the linear model across same-class and between-class, then conditioned by whether words are singly or multitokenized.

(Table A4). As we saw that tokenization (single vs. multiple) has a significant effect on transfer, we report results (AUC and average marginal effect) by tokeniza-tion. (For example, AUC-single is the clusterabil-ity metric but only on the portion of the similarity matrix corresponding to singly-tokenized words.) We again compute a linear model in the same way as before, but with factors only for class and tok-enization . Eff diff in the last two columns gives the difference between marginal effects for in-class vs. between-class transfer, separated by single to-ken (second-to-last column) and multi-token (last column) conditions. This effect size and p-value indicates whether or not the two classes (deverbal vs. comparative) are distinguished by the model using perturbation. Row 1 reproduces the main text result for RoBERTa-large. Row 2 ablates the contrastive loss: normally we train (+tall, -taller), but here we train only to (+tall). Evaluation in the no-contrastive set-ting is still computed with log odds of both items (tall, taller). In the following rows we explore three remap-ping changes which are potentially linguistically meaningful. First , we set the context to ∅ and per-turb only on the critical region. Single-token words are still well-distinguished (AUC 0.995), but multi-token words have clusterability of only 0.681. In other words, without context, transfer in singly-tokenized pairs still reflects differences in morpho-logical class. On the other hand, multi-token words are no longer separated, suggesting that the model may rely more on context to achieve stable repre-sentations for multitoken words. (Note that effects in the no-context setting are larger since perturba-tion is no longer conditioned on any context.) 

Second , instead of contrastively perturbing e.g., toward tall and away from taller , we perturb only towards a different static token, blue . This allows us to assess how the model transfers the pertur-bation from the context alone, without any direct feedback about the intended content of the critical region. For completeness, we present this result both with and without contrastive loss; the linguis-tically meaningful result that captures transfer due to context only is the one without contrastive loss. This approach gives overall AUC of 0.74, showing that the contexts contain meaningful information that affects how the model generalizes the training remapping. 

Third , we test transfer using an unknown mor-pheme (e.g. taller -> talleze). (Note, in this setting, we evaluate on talleze vs. taller rather than tall vs. taller.) This produces the lowest AUC, and the model again fails to distinguish the deverbal and comparative in the multitoken setting (p=0.022). In other words, perturbing to a novel suffix inhibits transfer along morphological class dimension, pos-sibly because the model is unlikely to have a pre-existing representation for X-eze . (Moreover, the fact that X-eze is always multi-tokenized, is likely to further confound transfer.) 

B.5 Additional results for other models 

We use the following parameters for pertur-bation (chosen by highest clusterability AUC on the train set): RoBERTa-base: LR=1e-5, epochs=5; RoBERTa-large: LR=1e-5, epochs=5; 16 babylm-gpt-bert Deverbal Comparative untrained 

> Deverbal Comparative

trained 

deverbal comparative 

> −2.50.02.55.07.510 .012 .515 .017 .5

effects (trained) 

deverbal comp 

> mbert-base Deverbal Comparative
> Deverbal Comparative

deverbal comparative 

> −10123

deverbal comp 

> mbert-large Deverbal Comparative
> Deverbal Comparative

deverbal comparative  

> −2
> −1012345

deverbal comp 

> rob-base Deverbal Comparative
> Deverbal Comparative

deverbal comparative 

> −10123

deverbal comp 

> −6
> −4
> −20246
> −6
> −4
> −20246
> −3
> −2
> −10123
> −3
> −2
> −10123
> −3
> −2
> −10123
> −3
> −2
> −10123
> −3
> −2
> −10123
> −3
> −2
> −10123

Figure A1: Results for all models, with untrained on left, trained in middle, and effect distribution (log-odds) in trained models on right. Effect sizes in the heatmaps are clipped to 7,3,3,3,3 respectively (effect sizes vary based on learning rate, which was tuned per model) so that the diagonal does not hide the rest of the heatmap structure. The final row (rob-large) is the same as is shown in the main text. 

17 Model AUC un-trained           

> AUC trained
> ModernBERT-B 0.53 0.84
> ModernBERT-L 0.54 0.86
> RoBERTa-B 0.51 0.87
> RoBERTa-L 0.52 0.89
> GPT-BERT 0.54 0.74
> Table A5: Morphology: AUC clusterability across models by train status.

ModernBERT-base: LR=5e-5, epochs=3; ModernBERT-large: LR=5e-5, epochs=3; GPT-BERT: LR=5e-4, epochs=5. AUC clusterability is given in Table A5, and transfer-based similarity matrices are shown in Fig-ure A1. 

C Supplement for Section 4: Lexical Representations 

C.1 Methods Dataset We provide additional details for the CoarseWSD-20 dataset (CWSD; Loureiro et al. 2021). All sentences in the dataset are entirely lowercase. The dataset consists of the following words: apple, arm, bank, bass, bow, chair, club, crane, deck, digit, hood, java, mole, pitcher, pound, seal, spring, square, trunk, yard. When sampling sentences for our train and test sets, we omit a small number of examples where the target word occurs multiple times in the sen-tence. As noted in §4, for each of the 20 words in the dataset, we sample 100 examples equally bal-anced over the senses for that word. Some words have insufficient examples for a given sense. In those cases, clusterability is reweighted to be bal-anced (see A.4). The total number of examples sampled is 1606 (versus 2000 possible), with 136k similarity scores for analysis. As we find that tokenization can impact pertur-bation results (§3), we report words that are not singly tokenized: For RoBERTa, 5 usages in the test dataset have the target word split into two tokens (this can happen, for example, if the tar-get word occurs at the start of the sentence). For Modern-BERT, in addition to those 5 usages, all usages of ‘crane’ are two tokens. For GPT-BERT, ‘crane’, ‘hood’, ‘java’, ‘mole’, and ‘pitcher’ are always two tokens. 

Hyperparameters Hyperparameters (learning rate and number of epochs) were tuned on separate data for training (the CWSD train      

> Word Perturb AUC
> glam 0.871
> aaaa 0.883
> acuity 0.865
> nonce 0.889
> Table A6: Average AUC on test set using other perturbation targets in ModernBERT-large.

split) to maximize average AUC clusterabil-ity across word senses. For the final test, we use the following settings: RoBERTa-base: LR=3e-6, epochs=3; RoBERTa-large: LR=3e-6, epochs=1; ModernBERT-base: LR=3e-5, epochs=3; ModernBERT-large: LR=3e-5, epochs=3; GPT-BERT: LR=1e-6, epochs=1. 

Computations For the word-vector baseline, we run the model forward and extract the hidden state. When a word has multiple tokens, we follow Teglia et al. (2025) and average. We normalize with Eu-clidean norm prior to computing the similarity ma-trix, which is just the dot products of the two repre-sentations. 

C.2 Additional results: other perturbation targets 

We test three other remapping targets on ModernBERT-large for the test set (note that hy-perparameters were tuned using “glam”); see Ta-ble A6. 

C.3 Similarity visualizations 

See Figure A6. Perturbation provides both quanti-tatively higher AUC and qualitatively better visual separation between word senses. Perturbation also more clearly reveals graded relatedness of different senses. For example, for square , there is visibly more transfer between the geometric shape usage and the town square usage (which share a notion of shape) than there is between either of these usages and the company usage (which has little semanti-cally in common with the geometric notion of a square). 

D Supplement for Section 5: Syntactic Representations 

D.1 Methods Dataset Table A7 is reproduced from Boguraev et al. (2025) and shows example non-embedded, animate minimal pairs. For description of the inan-imate and embedded conditions, the reader is re-ferred to the original paper. 18 Construction Prefix Filler NC Article NP Verb Label                                         

> Emb. Wh-Q ( Know ) I know who/that the man liked ./him Emb. Wh- ( Wonder ) I wonder who/if the man liked ./him Matrix Wh-Q Who/"" did the man like ?/him Restr. Rel. Clause The boy who/and the man liked was/him Cleft It was the boy/clear that the man liked ./the boy Pseudo-Cleft Who/That the man liked was/it Topicalization Actually, the boy/"" the man liked ./the boy Agreement Control ( ctrl-agr ) The boy/boys that the man liked is/are Transitive Control ( ctrl-trans )Once/Today some/that man/boy ran/liked ./him Table A7: Studied filler-gap pairs, reproduced from Boguraev et al. (2025)

Perturbation During perturbation training and evaluation, for all completions/targets (sentence suffixes) in the Boguraev et al. dataset, only the first token of any completion is considered. We confirmed that this is consistent with how Bogu-raev et al. conducted their experiments. Though some examples in the dataset have multiple word targets, the authors confirmed (p.c.) that only the first (singly-tokenized) word is considered in these cases. The perturbation code released with our work is implemented so that multiple token targets can be targeted. Though we test multitoken targets in the MLM case, we do not do so in the autoregressive case, to improve comparability to prior work. 

Experiment For each trial, we sample a single perturbation target and 25 disjoint evaluation exam-ples. For each of of the 34 conditions (7 FG × 2animacy × 2 embeddedness, plus 2 ×2 cross of an-imacy and embeddedness conditions for ctrl-trans ,plus 2 embeddedness conditions for ctrl-agr ), we run 5 separate trials (34 × 5 total perturbations). Because we are trying to perturb the model’s rep-resentation of FG constructions, we always perturb to the incorrect completion in a minimal pair (e.g., 

I know who the man liked him , The boy that the man liked are , Once some man ran him ). For these 

training perturbations, the prefix string is always FG (e.g., who), singular (e.g., boy), or intransitive (e.g., ran). (These are all parallel in the structure of Table A7.) For evaluation, we use both versions of the prefix string for FG (these form our FG, nonFG condi-tions). For evaluation we do not make use of plural 

ctrl-agr nor transitive ctrl-trans .

Hyperparameters For hyperparameter tuning (learning rate and number of epochs), we max-imize AUC clusterability, where we take as our classes FG and controls ( ctrl-agr , ctrl-trans ). We do not consider whether the model groups different controls together, just whether the entire group ctrl-agr and ctrl-trans is more self-similar than similar to FG. Final hyperparameters for Pythia-1.4B are LR=1e-6 and epochs=5. 

D.2 Effects of Critical Region Similarity 

We compute critical region similarity (CRS) for the minimal pairs using a modified Jaccard mea-sure. The similarity of any two conditions S(i, j )

is given by 

S(i, j ) = 

X

> w∈V

min  Ci(w), C j (w)

max( Ti, T j )

where V is the space of all possible label words, 

Ci(w) is the count of the word w in the minimal pairs for condition i, and Ti = P 

> w∈V

Ci is the total size of the label space for class i.We compute the modified Jaccard similarity on the train split (the test split has similar CRS) for the FG targets/completions (Figure A2), the non-FG targets/completions (Figure A3), and both together (Figure A4). In Boguraev et al. (2025), during train-ing, DAS learns parameters such that the model outputs the FG label (Figure A2). During evalua-tion, the effect of the intervention learned by DAS is evaluated simultaneously against both the FG and non-FG targets. 

Observations and implications As noted in the main text, in the FG condition, ctrl-agr has no output targets in common with pseudocleft or re-stricted relative clause (i.e., CRS is 0), and is thus an anticonservative control. In their Section 5, Boguraev et al. study the degree of transfer be-tween different FG conditions, but they do not con-trol for the confound shown here. We note that while our baselined-transfer con-dition should account for differences in CRS, we 19 cl an wh know an wh won an pscl an res rc an top an whq an cl inan wh know inan wh won inan pscl inan res rc inan top inan whq inan cl an emb wh know an emb wh won an emb pscl an emb res rc an emb top an emb whq an emb cl inan emb wh know inan emb wh won inan emb pscl inan emb res rc inan emb top inan emb whq inan emb ctl agr emb ctl agr ctl trans an ctl trans inan emb ctl trans an emb ctl trans inan Figure A2: Modified Jaccard similarity of output labels (CRS) for minimal pairs across conditions for FG condi-tion. This corresponds to the target labels toward which perturbation and DAS train, and to positive evaluation effects. 

may nonetheless still observe patterning in filler-gap similarities that resemble the CRS matrix. This a strength of our design: we want to be able to capture deeper representational similarity even be-tween construction types that are similar for more superficial reasons, and our controls enable us to do this. 

D.3 Additional discussion of transfer over the course of training 

In Figure 4, FG and non-FG are seen to be nearly perfectly confounded through step 512. They differ only in, e.g., who vs. that , and thus transfer from FG to non-FG is likely mediated by token set over-lap before the FG/non-FG distinction is learned. Through step 512, we also see transfer to/from 

ctrl-trans . Note that this corresponds to transfer to/from the perturbation I know who the man liked 

. [. → him] from/to Once some man ran . [. →

him]. In this case, excess transfer between FG and 

ctrl-trans could be mediated by confounding of transitive and intransitive verbs or by the absence of an FG-nonFG distinction. We did not investigate the extent to which the model confounds transitive and intransitive verbs early on, but even without an FG-nonFG distinction, as the model learns to dis-tinguish transitive and intransitive verbs, we would expect transfer to ctrl-trans to decrease. 

D.4 Statistical comparisons 

We conduct some additional statistical analyses. 

Transfer to/from FG is significant First, we test the significance of observed differences in Fig 4B. cl an wh know an wh won an pscl an res rc an top an whq an cl inan wh know inan wh won inan pscl inan res rc inan top inan whq inan cl an emb wh know an emb wh won an emb pscl an emb res rc an emb top an emb whq an emb cl inan emb wh know inan emb wh won inan emb pscl inan emb res rc inan emb top inan emb whq inan emb ctl agr emb ctl agr ctl trans an ctl trans inan emb ctl trans an emb ctl trans inan 

Figure A3: Modified Jaccard similarity of output labels (CRS) for minimal pairs across conditions for the non-FG condition. This corresponds to the contrastive / anti-loss target for perturbation. DAS does not use this in training. This affects negative evaluation effects in both perturbation and DAS. cl an wh know an wh won an pscl an res rc an top an whq an cl inan wh know inan wh won inan pscl inan res rc inan top inan whq inan cl an emb wh know an emb wh won an emb pscl an emb res rc an emb top an emb whq an emb cl inan emb wh know inan emb wh won inan emb pscl inan emb res rc inan emb top inan emb whq inan emb ctl agr emb ctl agr ctl trans an ctl trans inan emb ctl trans an emb ctl trans inan 

Figure A4: Modified Jaccard similarity of output labels (CRS) for minimal pairs across conditions aggregating both FG and non-FG labels. 

We tested whether mean FG->FG effect is greater than FG->non-FG and FG->control effects using a one-sided permutation tests (n = 5,000 permutations). FG->FG effects are significantly larger than both FG->non-FG (difference = 0.90, 

p < 0.001 ) and FG->control (difference = 1.18, 

p < 0.001 ). We also tested whether the effects are signif-icantly greater in trained than untrained models (i.e. for each pair of violin plots): All were significant ( p < 0.001 ) with average difference (trained - untrained): FG->FG diff=1.55, FG->non-FG diff=0.65, FG -> ctl diff=0.21, ctl->FG diff = 0.36 ctl -> non-FG = 0.20 

Effects of animacy and embeddedness In the original Boguraev et al. study as well as our 20 condition trained class effect p-val 

diff 0.001 0.73 

same_an 0.014 0.002 

same_inan 0.003 0.49 

diff 0.773 < 0.001 

same_an 1.358 < 0.001 

same_inan 1.037 < 0.001 

diff 0.006 0.07 

same_emb -0.004 0.43 

same_unemb 0.016 < 0.001 

diff 0.687 < 0.001 

same_emb 1.356 < 0.001 

same_unemb 1.124 < 0.001 

animacy 

false 

true 

embed 

false 

true 

Table A8: Syntax (filler-gap) Linear Model: Average effects for baselined-transfer by model trained status and animacy and embeddedness condition. 

own, the animacy and embeddedness manipula-tions were primarily intended as controls to test whether abstract FG transfer occurred across these manipulations. However, Boguraev et al. report that these control manipulations have a substantial impact on transfer in and of themselves (i.e., DAS transfer is higher when the items match vs mis-match the animacy of the extracted element). Here we explore whether perturbations in this dataset also transfer along animacy and embeddedness dimensions. Within the FG conditions, we test aggregate baselined-transfer across animacy and embeddedness conditions quantitatively using lin-ear regression with three factors: animacy has three levels: same-animate, same-inanimate, and different; embeddedness has three levels: same-emb, same-unemb, and different; trained is true or false. We again perform post-estimation using the 

marginal-effects package. The response vari-able is the unaggregated cell values (log-odds ratio) from the matrices in Figure A7, using the third column, which is baselined-transfer , and the first row (step 0, untrained) and the last row (step 143k, trained), for a total of 196k observations. Marginal effects are given in Table A8. In all but one case, effects are not significantly different from 0 for untrained models. All effects in trained models are significant ( p < 0.001 ). Within trained models, the effect of same vs. dif-ferent animacy and embeddedness is significant: the marginal effect of same animacy vs. diff ani-macy is 0.42, p < 0.001 and same embeddnedness vs. diff embeddedness is 0.55, p < 0.001 .cleft                                           

> who_know
> who_wonder
> pseudo_cleft
> restricted_rc
> topicalization
> who_question
> 1.6 0.9 1.0 1.0 1.1 0.9 0.8
> 0.5 1.1 1.2 1.1 0.6 0.6 0.9
> 0.6 1.2 1.6 1.3 0.7 0.6 1.1
> 0.5 0.9 1.1 2.8 0.4 0.6 1.3
> 0.9 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.6 0.8 0.8
> 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.4 0.7 0.4
> 0.3 0.6 0.9 1.5 0.4 0.5 1.6

Figure A5: Average baselined-transfer in Pythia-1.4B aggregated by FG condition. This corresponds to an aggregate (averaged) of the final step 143k FG-nonFG plot in Figure A7. 

D.5 Comments on FG similarities 

While we have argued for a common core of rep-resentation across the FG conditions, we have not studied representational differences/similarities between the different FG conditions themselves. While highly relevant to linguistic theory (Sag, 2010), a full treatment of this question is beyond the scope of this work, and here we simply offer some exploratory observations. In Figure A5 we show aggregated (across animacy and embedded-ness conditions) baselined-transfer . We make the following observations: first, topicalization shows the lowest transfer in and out. Second, self-transfer in pseudoclefts is notably higher than for other con-ditions. Third, off-diagonal, the most substantial transfers ( > 1.1) are who_question to/from pseudo-cleft (1.5,1.3); who_nonfinite to pseudocleft (1.3); wh_finite to/from wh_nonfinite (1.2, 1.2). Further work is needed substantiate these observations and link them to theoretical accounts of linguistic rep-resentations. 

E Use of AI Assistants 

ChatGPT and Claude (AIs) were used to produce initial versions of some visualization code. Some code was initially generated by AI for human re-view. All code (including from AIs) used in this study was carefully tested and reviewed by the au-thors. 21 auc: 0.91 

> apple  1
> 2

perturb 

trained 

> auc: 0.54

perturb 

untrained 

> auc: 0.78

cos 

trained 

> auc: 0.53

cos 

untrained         

> auc: 0.95
> arm  1
> 2
> auc: 0.55 auc: 0.89 auc: 0.53
> auc: 0.89
> bank  1
> 2
> auc: 0.55 auc: 0.73 auc: 0.52
> auc: 0.69
> bass  1
> 2
> 3
> auc: 0.55 auc: 0.60 auc: 0.52
> auc: 0.79
> bow  1
> 2
> 3
> auc: 0.54 auc: 0.67 auc: 0.53
> 0.0
> 7.5
> 15.0
> 18.0
> 20.5
> 23.0
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 0.92
> 0.97
> 1.00
> 0.0
> 7.5
> 15.0
> 18.0
> 20.5
> 23.0
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 0.92
> 0.97
> 1.00
> 0.0
> 7.5
> 15.0
> 18.0
> 20.5
> 23.0
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 0.92
> 0.97
> 1.00
> 0.0
> 7.5
> 15.0
> 18.0
> 20.5
> 23.0
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 0.92
> 0.97
> 1.00
> 0.0
> 7.5
> 15.0
> 18.0
> 20.5
> 23.0
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 0.92
> 0.97
> 1.00

Figure A6: Lexical Representations: Similarity matrices for all words with ModernBERT-large. Clipping: Values for perturbation trained are clipped to 15 so that the diagonal does not overwhelm visualization. Values for perturb untrained and cosine untrained are clipped to show as much structure as possible. The color scale is nonlinear to enhance visualize distinction (computed with PowerNorm). We note that the three senses for bass are bass guitar, bass (vocal), and bass (string instrument). bow has three senses: bow of a boat, bow (and arrow), bow for string instrument. The second and third senses seem to interact; both are bow-shaped. 

22 auc: 0.88 

> chair

1

2

perturb 

trained 

auc: 0.55 

perturb 

untrained 

auc: 0.83 

cos 

trained 

auc: 0.53 

cos 

untrained 

auc: 0.87 

> club

1

2

3

auc: 0.53 auc: 0.73 auc: 0.52 

auc: 0.85 

> crane

1

2

auc: 0.53 auc: 0.74 auc: 0.52 

auc: 0.67 

> deck

1

2

auc: 0.49 auc: 0.54 auc: 0.52 

auc: 0.96 

> digit

1

2

auc: 0.58 auc: 0.88 auc: 0.53 

0.0 

7.5 

15.0 

18.0 

20.5 

23.0 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

0.92 

0.97 

1.00 

0.0 

7.5 

15.0 

18.0 

20.5 

23.0 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

0.92 

0.97 

1.00 

0.0 

7.5 

15.0 

18.0 

20.5 

23.0 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

0.92 

0.97 

1.00 

0.0 

7.5 

15.0 

18.0 

20.5 

23.0 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

0.92 

0.97 

1.00 

0.0 

7.5 

15.0 

18.0 

20.5 

23.0 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

0.92 

0.97 

1.00 Figure A6: (Fig contd). The apparently anomalous bottom 3 rows/cols for chair (seat vs. e.g., academic position) are mislabeled. deck has only two senses (deck of boat, deck as of a house), with the second having only 7 examples in the test dataset. 

23 auc: 0.88 

> hood

1

2

3

perturb 

trained 

auc: 0.62 

perturb 

untrained 

auc: 0.79 

cos 

trained 

auc: 0.56 

cos 

untrained 

auc: 0.94 

> java

1

2

auc: 0.53 auc: 0.90 auc: 0.52 

auc: 0.95 

> mole

1

2

3

4

5

auc: 0.59 auc: 0.85 auc: 0.57 

auc: 0.91 

> pitcher

1

2

auc: 0.65 auc: 0.85 auc: 0.59 

auc: 0.79 

> pound

1

2

auc: 0.53 auc: 0.67 auc: 0.51 

0.0 

7.5 

15.0 

18.0 

20.5 

23.0 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

0.92 

0.97 

1.00 

0.0 

7.5 

15.0 

18.0 

20.5 

23.0 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

0.92 

0.97 

1.00 

0.0 

7.5 

15.0 

18.0 

20.5 

23.0 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

0.92 

0.97 

1.00 

0.0 

7.5 

15.0 

18.0 

20.5 

23.0 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

0.92 

0.97 

1.00 

0.0 

7.5 

15.0 

18.0 

20.5 

23.0 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

0.92 

0.97 

1.00 Figure A6: (Fig contd). 

24 auc: 0.91 

> seal

1

2

3

4

perturb 

trained 

auc: 0.54 

perturb 

untrained 

auc: 0.71 

cos 

trained 

auc: 0.52 

cos 

untrained 

auc: 0.90 

> spring

1

2

3

auc: 0.55 auc: 0.88 auc: 0.53 

auc: 0.94 

> square

1

2

3

4

auc: 0.54 auc: 0.87 auc: 0.52 

auc: 0.90 

> trunk

1

2

3

auc: 0.56 auc: 0.74 auc: 0.53 

auc: 0.82 

> yard

1

2

auc: 0.55 auc: 0.73 auc: 0.53 

0.0 

7.5 

15.0 

18.0 

20.5 

23.0 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

0.92 

0.97 

1.00 

0.0 

7.5 

15.0 

18.0 

20.5 

23.0 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

0.92 

0.97 

1.00 

0.0 

7.5 

15.0 

18.0 

20.5 

23.0 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

0.92 

0.97 

1.00 

0.0 

7.5 

15.0 

18.0 

20.5 

23.0 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

0.92 

0.97 

1.00 

0.0 

7.5 

15.0 

18.0 

20.5 

23.0 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

0.92 

0.97 

1.00 Figure A6: (Fig contd). The four senses of seal : animal, R&B singer, mark, mechanical. The senses for square 

were discussed in the main text. The cross pattern is the result of differences in tokenization: examples forming the cross pattern have square at sentence start so the token has no included starting space character. 

25 cl an wh know an wh won an pscl an res rc an top an whq an cl inan wh know inan wh won inan pscl inan res rc inan top inan whq inan cl an emb wh know an emb wh won an emb pscl an emb res rc an emb top an emb whq an emb cl inan emb wh know inan emb wh won inan emb pscl inan emb res rc inan emb top inan emb whq inan emb ctl agr emb ctl agr ctl trans an ctl trans inan emb ctl trans an emb ctl trans inan 

step 0 – normal FG non-FG baselined-transfer (FG - non-FG) 

cl an wh know an wh won an pscl an res rc an top an whq an cl inan wh know inan wh won inan pscl inan res rc inan top inan whq inan cl an emb wh know an emb wh won an emb pscl an emb res rc an emb top an emb whq an emb cl inan emb wh know inan emb wh won inan emb pscl inan emb res rc inan emb top inan emb whq inan emb ctl agr emb ctl agr ctl trans an ctl trans inan emb ctl trans an emb ctl trans inan 

step 16 – normal FG non-FG baselined-transfer (FG - non-FG) 

cl an wh know an wh won an pscl an res rc an top an whq an cl inan wh know inan wh won inan pscl inan res rc inan top inan whq inan cl an emb wh know an emb wh won an emb pscl an emb res rc an emb top an emb whq an emb cl inan emb wh know inan emb wh won inan emb pscl inan emb res rc inan emb top inan emb whq inan emb ctl agr emb ctl agr ctl trans an ctl trans inan emb ctl trans an emb ctl trans inan 

step 128 – normal FG non-FG baselined-transfer (FG - non-FG) 

> cl an wh know an wh won an pscl an res rc an top an whq an cl inan wh know inan wh won inan pscl inan res rc inan top inan whq inan cl an emb wh know an emb wh won an emb pscl an emb res rc an emb top an emb whq an emb cl inan emb wh know inan emb wh won inan emb pscl inan emb res rc inan emb top inan emb whq inan emb ctl agr emb ctl agr ctl trans an ctl trans inan emb ctl trans an emb ctl trans inan

cl an wh know an wh won an pscl an res rc an top an whq an cl inan wh know inan wh won inan pscl inan res rc inan top inan whq inan cl an emb wh know an emb wh won an emb pscl an emb res rc an emb top an emb whq an emb cl inan emb wh know inan emb wh won inan emb pscl inan emb res rc inan emb top inan emb whq inan emb ctl agr emb ctl agr ctl trans an ctl trans inan emb ctl trans an emb ctl trans inan 

step 256 – normal FG 

> cl an wh know an wh won an pscl an res rc an top an whq an cl inan wh know inan wh won inan pscl inan res rc inan top inan whq inan cl an emb wh know an emb wh won an emb pscl an emb res rc an emb top an emb whq an emb cl inan emb wh know inan emb wh won inan emb pscl inan emb res rc inan emb top inan emb whq inan emb

non-FG 

> cl an wh know an wh won an pscl an res rc an top an whq an cl inan wh know inan wh won inan pscl inan res rc inan top inan whq inan cl an emb wh know an emb wh won an emb pscl an emb res rc an emb top an emb whq an emb cl inan emb wh know inan emb wh won inan emb pscl inan emb res rc inan emb top inan emb whq inan emb

baselined-transfer (FG - non-FG) 

−2

−1012345

−2

−1012345

−2

−1012345

−2

−1012345Figure A7: Syntactic Representations: Plots over the course of Pythia-1.4b training. Column one (FG) is non-

baselined-transfer , column two (non-FG) is transfer to the minimal non-FG control, and column three gives 

baselined-transfer . As non-FG tests transfer only from FG → nonFG, the rightmost 6 columns from the FG matrices are not present (and similarly for baselined-transfer ). Patterning in early steps is clearly seen, which reflects the non-independence of the underlying output label sets. Each cell is an average of 125 effect scores from 5 trials each with 25 evaluation remappings. 

26 cl an wh know an wh won an pscl an res rc an top an whq an cl inan wh know inan wh won inan pscl inan res rc inan top inan whq inan cl an emb wh know an emb wh won an emb pscl an emb res rc an emb top an emb whq an emb cl inan emb wh know inan emb wh won inan emb pscl inan emb res rc inan emb top inan emb whq inan emb ctl agr emb ctl agr ctl trans an ctl trans inan emb ctl trans an emb ctl trans inan 

step 512 – normal FG non-FG baselined-transfer (FG - non-FG) 

cl an wh know an wh won an pscl an res rc an top an whq an cl inan wh know inan wh won inan pscl inan res rc inan top inan whq inan cl an emb wh know an emb wh won an emb pscl an emb res rc an emb top an emb whq an emb cl inan emb wh know inan emb wh won inan emb pscl inan emb res rc inan emb top inan emb whq inan emb ctl agr emb ctl agr ctl trans an ctl trans inan emb ctl trans an emb ctl trans inan 

step 1000 – normal FG non-FG baselined-transfer (FG - non-FG) 

cl an wh know an wh won an pscl an res rc an top an whq an cl inan wh know inan wh won inan pscl inan res rc inan top inan whq inan cl an emb wh know an emb wh won an emb pscl an emb res rc an emb top an emb whq an emb cl inan emb wh know inan emb wh won inan emb pscl inan emb res rc inan emb top inan emb whq inan emb ctl agr emb ctl agr ctl trans an ctl trans inan emb ctl trans an emb ctl trans inan 

step 2000 – normal FG non-FG baselined-transfer (FG - non-FG) 

> cl an wh know an wh won an pscl an res rc an top an whq an cl inan wh know inan wh won inan pscl inan res rc inan top inan whq inan cl an emb wh know an emb wh won an emb pscl an emb res rc an emb top an emb whq an emb cl inan emb wh know inan emb wh won inan emb pscl inan emb res rc inan emb top inan emb whq inan emb ctl agr emb ctl agr ctl trans an ctl trans inan emb ctl trans an emb ctl trans inan

cl an wh know an wh won an pscl an res rc an top an whq an cl inan wh know inan wh won inan pscl inan res rc inan top inan whq inan cl an emb wh know an emb wh won an emb pscl an emb res rc an emb top an emb whq an emb cl inan emb wh know inan emb wh won inan emb pscl inan emb res rc inan emb top inan emb whq inan emb ctl agr emb ctl agr ctl trans an ctl trans inan emb ctl trans an emb ctl trans inan 

step 5000 – normal FG 

> cl an wh know an wh won an pscl an res rc an top an whq an cl inan wh know inan wh won inan pscl inan res rc inan top inan whq inan cl an emb wh know an emb wh won an emb pscl an emb res rc an emb top an emb whq an emb cl inan emb wh know inan emb wh won inan emb pscl inan emb res rc inan emb top inan emb whq inan emb

non-FG 

> cl an wh know an wh won an pscl an res rc an top an whq an cl inan wh know inan wh won inan pscl inan res rc inan top inan whq inan cl an emb wh know an emb wh won an emb pscl an emb res rc an emb top an emb whq an emb cl inan emb wh know inan emb wh won inan emb pscl inan emb res rc inan emb top inan emb whq inan emb

baselined-transfer (FG - non-FG) 

−2

−1012345

−2

−1012345

−2

−1012345

−2

−1012345Figure A7: (Fig contd). 

27 cl an wh know an wh won an pscl an res rc an top an whq an cl inan wh know inan wh won inan pscl inan res rc inan top inan whq inan cl an emb wh know an emb wh won an emb pscl an emb res rc an emb top an emb whq an emb cl inan emb wh know inan emb wh won inan emb pscl inan emb res rc inan emb top inan emb whq inan emb ctl agr emb ctl agr ctl trans an ctl trans inan emb ctl trans an emb ctl trans inan 

step 10000 – normal FG non-FG baselined-transfer (FG - non-FG) 

cl an wh know an wh won an pscl an res rc an top an whq an cl inan wh know inan wh won inan pscl inan res rc inan top inan whq inan cl an emb wh know an emb wh won an emb pscl an emb res rc an emb top an emb whq an emb cl inan emb wh know inan emb wh won inan emb pscl inan emb res rc inan emb top inan emb whq inan emb ctl agr emb ctl agr ctl trans an ctl trans inan emb ctl trans an emb ctl trans inan 

step 20000 – normal FG non-FG baselined-transfer (FG - non-FG) 

cl an wh know an wh won an pscl an res rc an top an whq an cl inan wh know inan wh won inan pscl inan res rc inan top inan whq inan cl an emb wh know an emb wh won an emb pscl an emb res rc an emb top an emb whq an emb cl inan emb wh know inan emb wh won inan emb pscl inan emb res rc inan emb top inan emb whq inan emb ctl agr emb ctl agr ctl trans an ctl trans inan emb ctl trans an emb ctl trans inan 

step 50000 – normal FG non-FG baselined-transfer (FG - non-FG) 

> cl an wh know an wh won an pscl an res rc an top an whq an cl inan wh know inan wh won inan pscl inan res rc inan top inan whq inan cl an emb wh know an emb wh won an emb pscl an emb res rc an emb top an emb whq an emb cl inan emb wh know inan emb wh won inan emb pscl inan emb res rc inan emb top inan emb whq inan emb ctl agr emb ctl agr ctl trans an ctl trans inan emb ctl trans an emb ctl trans inan

cl an wh know an wh won an pscl an res rc an top an whq an cl inan wh know inan wh won inan pscl inan res rc inan top inan whq inan cl an emb wh know an emb wh won an emb pscl an emb res rc an emb top an emb whq an emb cl inan emb wh know inan emb wh won inan emb pscl inan emb res rc inan emb top inan emb whq inan emb ctl agr emb ctl agr ctl trans an ctl trans inan emb ctl trans an emb ctl trans inan 

step 100000 – normal FG 

> cl an wh know an wh won an pscl an res rc an top an whq an cl inan wh know inan wh won inan pscl inan res rc inan top inan whq inan cl an emb wh know an emb wh won an emb pscl an emb res rc an emb top an emb whq an emb cl inan emb wh know inan emb wh won inan emb pscl inan emb res rc inan emb top inan emb whq inan emb

non-FG 

> cl an wh know an wh won an pscl an res rc an top an whq an cl inan wh know inan wh won inan pscl inan res rc inan top inan whq inan cl an emb wh know an emb wh won an emb pscl an emb res rc an emb top an emb whq an emb cl inan emb wh know inan emb wh won inan emb pscl inan emb res rc inan emb top inan emb whq inan emb

baselined-transfer (FG - non-FG) 

−2

−1012345

−2

−1012345

−2

−1012345

−2

−1012345Figure A7: (Fig contd). 

28 cl an wh know an wh won an pscl an res rc an top an whq an cl inan wh know inan wh won inan pscl inan res rc inan top inan whq inan cl an emb wh know an emb wh won an emb pscl an emb res rc an emb top an emb whq an emb cl inan emb wh know inan emb wh won inan emb pscl inan emb res rc inan emb top inan emb whq inan emb ctl agr emb ctl agr ctl trans an ctl trans inan emb ctl trans an emb ctl trans inan 

cl an wh know an wh won an pscl an res rc an top an whq an cl inan wh know inan wh won inan pscl inan res rc inan top inan whq inan cl an emb wh know an emb wh won an emb pscl an emb res rc an emb top an emb whq an emb cl inan emb wh know inan emb wh won inan emb pscl inan emb res rc inan emb top inan emb whq inan emb ctl agr emb ctl agr ctl trans an ctl trans inan emb ctl trans an emb ctl trans inan 

step 143000 – normal FG 

> cl an wh know an wh won an pscl an res rc an top an whq an cl inan wh know inan wh won inan pscl inan res rc inan top inan whq inan cl an emb wh know an emb wh won an emb pscl an emb res rc an emb top an emb whq an emb cl inan emb wh know inan emb wh won inan emb pscl inan emb res rc inan emb top inan emb whq inan emb

non-FG 

> cl an wh know an wh won an pscl an res rc an top an whq an cl inan wh know inan wh won inan pscl inan res rc inan top inan whq inan cl an emb wh know an emb wh won an emb pscl an emb res rc an emb top an emb whq an emb cl inan emb wh know inan emb wh won inan emb pscl inan emb res rc inan emb top inan emb whq inan emb

baselined-transfer (FG - non-FG) 

−2

−1012345Figure A7: (Fig contd). 

29