Title: Generating Reports or Repeating Templates? Measuring and Mitigating Template Collapse in 3D CT Report Generation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.30984

Published Time: Mon, 01 Jun 2026 00:49:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# Generating Reports or Repeating Templates? Measuring and Mitigating Template Collapse in 3D CT Report Generation 

Tom Maye-Lasserre 1*, Yitong Li 1,2,3 *, Bailiang Jian 1,2,3 *,Morteza Ghahremani 1,2,3 , Benedikt Wiestler 1,2,3 , Christian Wachinger 1,2,3 

> 1

Technical University of Munich (TUM) 

> 2

TUM Hospital 

> 3

Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)  

> Correspondence: yi_tong.li@tum.de

Abstract 

Modern 3D medical vision-language models (VLMs) can generate fluent radiology-style text while exhibit critically low pathology detection and output diversity, collapsing to generic tem-plates that under-report rare yet critical find-ings. We identify this failure mode as Template Collapse . This failure stems from the unique constraints of 3D medical imaging, e.g., lim-ited data, severe label imbalance, and weak signals from volumetric encoders. Under these constraints, text-generation objectives encour-age shortcut learning and fluent but weakly grounded reports. We systematically diagnose the Template Collapse through clinical fidelity, output diversity, normal-template bias, and rare-finding survival. To mitigate it, we propose 

CLarGen , a decoupled framework that sepa-rates what to say (clinical detection) from how to say it (language synthesis). CLarGen uses (i) a Latent Query Transformer for multi-label pathology detection, (ii) pathology-guided re-trieval for clinically matched exemplars, and (iii) a medical language model to synthesize the final report from detected findings and re-trieved context. Across state-of-the-art 3D CT report generation baselines, CLarGen mitigates Template Collapse and substantially improves clinical accuracy (macro-F1 0.487 vs. 0.189; CRG 0.472 vs. 0.368) while maintaining flu-ent reporting. Our results suggest that explicit, measurable clinical grounding is essential for template-collapse-resistant 3D CT report gener-ation. Code will be released upon acceptance. 

1 Introduction 

Automated radiology report generation for 3D Computed Tomography (CT) is a high-stakes task, where the precise identification and description of pathological findings is the primary goal. A lin-guistically fluent report that omits a lung nodule or hallucinates a non-existent effusion is not merely 

> *Equal contribution.

suboptimal but potentially harmful. Consequently, the accuracy of what is reported must take prece-dence over the elegance of how it is written. However, our empirical study of recent vision-language models (VLMs) for 3D CT report gener-ation (Hamamci et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2025a; Hamamci et al., 2026; Hosseini et al., 2025; Jiang et al., 2025) showed a striking failure mode: instead of producing patient-specific reports, they tend to converge to a small set of generic report templates. We term this phenomenon Template Collapse . Fine-tuned with standard next-token prediction, these models can achieve strong conventional NLP flu-ency metrics (BLEU, ROUGE) while performing poorly on clinical detection (F1-score) and exhibit-ing severely limited report diversity. As illustrated in Fig. 1, their generated reports are linguistically plausible yet diagnostically uninformative, often clustering around a few dominant templates. This template-driven behavior biases generation toward common findings, reduces report diversity, and fre-quently suppresses rare yet clinically significant abnormalities that are critical for diagnosis and downstream medical decision-making. To our knowledge, this failure mode has not been explicitly characterized in prior work. While re-lated issues may already affect report generation in the more widely studied 2D setting (Bannur et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025), they are likely ampli-fied in 3D CT. Compared to 2D chest radiography, available 3D CT report datasets are substantially smaller (Hamamci et al., 2026; Hwang et al., 2025), labels are extremely imbalanced with most findings absent in any given scan, and 3D visual encoders must align large volumes of imaging information with fine-grained clinical semantics (Blankemeier et al., 2026). Subtle abnormalities are embedded within millions of voxels, yet the model must simul-taneously identify findings, reason about their rela-tionships, and generate a coherent report. Together, these factors create a low-signal, high-imbalance                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

> arXiv:2605.30984v1 [cs.CV] 29 May 2026 Examination secondary […].Trachea, both main bronchi
> are open .Mediastinal main vascular structures are
> normal .Heart size increased .Pericardial effusion -
> thickening was not observed .Calcific atheroma plaques
> are observed in the coronary arteries and aortic
> arch .Pericardial effusion is present in minimal plastering
> style .Afew lymph nodes measuring up to 15 mm are
> observed in the mediastinum and hilar regions .Thoracic
> esophagus calibration was normal and no significant […].A
> small amount of effusion is observed in both hemithorax,
> more prominent on the right .When examined in the lung
> parenchyma window ;Clarification of interstitial signs in
> both lungs,budding tree images being more prominent in
> the lower lobe of the right lung,and an increase in density
> consistent with the consolidation of 21 mm in the basal
> segment of the lower lobe of the left lung are observed .
> CTO slightly increased in favor of the heart .There is local
> thickening of the pericardium .[... ]Calcific atheroma
> plaques are observed in the ascending and descending
> aorta in the aortic arch, and in the coronary arteries .In
> almost all lymph node groups in the mediastinum, lymph
> nodes are present in the right lower paratracheal area,
> with acentral slightly hypodense appearance .Densities
> that partially level in the esophagus are observed .There are
> lymph nodes at the hilar level .When examined in the lung
> parenchyma window[ …].Consolidative areas with
> atelectasis -air bronchograms are observed in both lungs ,
> extending from the basal to the apex,in the vicinity of the
> pleural effusion is the most prominent on the right and
> also on the left .The described findings are also observed
> […].There are thickenings in the common interlobular
> septa ,more prominent in the upper lobes .
> Trachea and both main bronchi are
> open .No occlusive pathology was
> detected in the trachea and both main
> bronchi .[…]There are millimetric
> nonspecific nodules in both lungs .No
> mass or infiltrative lesion was detected in
> both lungs .Mediastinal structures cannot
> be evaluated optimally because contrast
> material is not given .As far as can be
> observed :Heart contour and size are
> normal .No pleural or pericardial effusion
> was detected .The widths of the
> mediastinal main vascular structures
> are normal .There are atheromatous
> plaques in the aorta and coronary
> arteries .There are no pathologically
> enlarged lymph nodes in the
> mediastinum and hilar regions[ …].No
> pathologically enlarged lymph nodes
> were observed .No lytic -destructive
> lesions were detected in the bone
> structures within the sections .

t-SNE embedding space 

CLarGen (Ours) report 

Ground -truth report 

CT -CHAT report 

Ground -truth 

SAMF 

CT -CHAT 

CLarGen 

Template collapse  phenomenon  F1 -score for different findings 

a

b

Template Clusters Figure 1: Template Collapse in 3D CT report generation. (a) Generated reports from VLM baselines form compact clusters in report-embedding space, indicating that many scans are mapped to a small set of semantically similar templates rather than patient-specific descriptions. The color-coded text shows that CLarGen preserves pathology-specific findings aligned with the ground-truth report, while baselines produce generic descriptions with limited findings. (b) Left: cumulative report coverage as a function of the number of unique templates further confirms that a few repeated report patterns (Appendix A.5.1) account for a large fraction of baseline outputs. Right: this produces a clinical bias: common findings are over-reported, while rare but critical pathologies are frequently missed. CLarGen mitigates these effects, producing a broader report distribution and maintaining detection performance across findings of varying prevalence. 

learning regime where standard text-optimization objectives provide weak incentives for diagnostic accuracy while strongly rewarding the reproduction of generic normal-report templates. To make this failure mode measurable, we eval-uate 3D CT report generation beyond surface-level text overlap. We treat Template Collapse as a joint degradation in clinical fidelity, report diversity, semantic spread, normal-bias similarity, dominant-template concentration, and rare-finding survival. This diagnostic view exposes failures that ROUGE/BLEU can obscure: a model may match common report phrasing while repeatedly omit-ting patient-specific abnormalities. Motivated by this diagnosis, we propose CLarGen, a decoupled framework that separates clinical detection from linguistic synthesis for 3D CT report generation. Recent approaches largely rely on end-to-end LLM fine-tuning, where pathology recognition and re-port generation are jointly optimized within a single model (Di Piazza et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2025b; Deng et al., 2025). In contrast, CLarGen explicitly disentangles into three stages: clinical perception, knowledge retrieval, and report synthesis. Our main contributions are threefold: (1) We identify and characterize Template Collapse , a fail-ure mode in 3D CT report generation where VLMs produce fluent but repetitive reports that suppress patient-specific findings. (2) We systematically measure this failure through complementary di-agnostic aspects. (3) We propose CLarGen, a pathology-guided retrieval-augmented framework that mitigates Template Collapse and substantially improves pathology detection while preserving flu-ent and clinically realistic reporting. 

2 Related Work 

Radiology report generation. Radiology report generation (RRG) has been studied primarily on 2D chest X-rays, where large-scale paired datasets and mature 2D visual encoders have enabled strong vision-language models (Bannur et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2025; Sun et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2025, 2026). Recently, the release of CT-RATE (Hamamci et al., 2026), the first large-scale paired 3D CT-report dataset, has accelerated research in 3D RRG. How-ever, 3D RRG remains substantially more challeng-ing due to limited paired data, the extreme sparsity of pathological findings within high-dimensional volumes (Hwang et al., 2025), and weaker semantic alignment between volumetric encoders and clini-cal language compared with 2D models. 

Vision-language models for 3D CT. The pre-vailing 3D RRG paradigm couples a 3D image encoder with a decoder-only LLM trained end-to-end via autoregressive next-token prediction, including CT2Rep (Hamamci et al., 2024), CT-CHAT (Hamamci et al., 2026), M3D (Bai et al., 2024), and 3D-CT-GPT (Chen et al., 2024) adapt-ing the LLaVA recipe (Liu et al., 2023) to volumet-ric inputs. Subsequent work has explored multi-scale 2D/3D fusion (Hosseini et al., 2025), region-and anatomy-guided grounding (Chen et al., 2025a; Kyung et al., 2025), interactive segmentation (Gu et al., 2025), generalist medical VLMs (Jiang et al., 2025; Blankemeier et al., 2026), and knowledge-based report augmentation (Baharoon et al., 2025). Recent work incorporates explicit clinical signals into report generation: CT-AGRG (Di Piazza et al., 2025) conditions generation on a learned abnormality vector, Dia-LLaMA (Chen et al., 2025b) introduces disease-aware prompting, and MvKeTR (Deng et al., 2025) proposes multi-view feature alignment. However, these methods are predominantly optimized with autoregressive lan-guage modeling objectives. We observe that, in the low-data and highly imbalanced 3D setting, such objectives can bias models toward frequent “normal” report templates rather than subtle patho-logical findings, leading to a failure mode we term 

template collapse . CLarGen differs in three key aspects: (i) perception and synthesis are explicitly decoupled through a pathology classifier trained with clinical supervision; (ii) retrieval is pathology-guided, ranking exemplars by predicted label con-sistency rather than embedding similarity alone; and (iii) the medical LLM remains frozen, preserv-ing pretrained clinical reasoning while reducing overfitting to frequent report templates. 

3 Method 

We now introduce CLarGen for 3D CT report gen-eration. As motivated in the introduction, Template Collapse refers to the tendency of autoregressive VLMs to produce fluent but repetitive reports that omit patient-specific findings; we empirically an-alyze this failure mode in Sec. 5. CLarGen is de-signed as a mitigation strategy: instead of asking one model to both detect subtle 3D findings and verbalize them, it makes clinical detection explicit before language synthesis. As shown in Fig. 2, CLarGen decomposes report generation into three stages: (1) explicit pathology modeling and classi-fication from 3D features, (2) label-aware retrieval of exemplar reports, and (3) report synthesis with a medical language model. This medical-grounded pipeline first converts 3D CT volumes into fine-grained visual tokens, predicts calibrated pathol-ogy scores to anchor clinically relevant retrieval, and finally conditions the LLM to consolidate this information into a final report. 

Stage 1: Latent query transformer for clini-cal perception. Given a frozen 3D image en-coder output Z ∈ RN ×D, global pooling risks obscuring small abnormalities such as small nod-ules. We therefore introduce a Latent Query Trans-former (LQT) with C = 18 learnable pathology queries Q ∈ RC×D. Each query represents a specific pathology (e.g., pleural effusion, atelec-tasis) and attends to Z via cross-attention to extract pathology-specific evidence, while self-attention among queries models clinical correlations be-tween findings. The refined queries are projected to multi-label logits. To address extreme class im-balance, we optimize a focal loss (Lin et al., 2017): 

LFL = −

> C

X

> c=1

αc (1 − pt,c )γ log( pt,c ), (1) where αc is the inverse class frequency and pt,c the predicted probability for class c. This stage pro-vides direct supervision on clinically meaningful targets, decoupled from language modeling. 

Stage 2: Pathology-Guided Retrieval. We re-trieve k exemplar reports that are visually sim-ilar to the query CT, clinically consistent with LLM 

> ...
> ❄
> Retriever
> ❄
> Latent Query Transformer

🔥   

> Database
> Findings :
> Impression :
> Findings :
> Alignable features
> - Cardiomegaly 0.9 - Pericardial effusion 0.2
> Cardiomegaly query - Cardiomegaly - Pericardial effusion ... - Hiatal hernia - Atelectasis
> Perdicardial query

... 

🔥   

> - Hietal hernia 0.9 - Atelectasis 0.2 ...
> Text encoder
> Fine-grained features
> Visual encoder

... 

> Expert finding:

CT 

> Projector
> Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3

Figure 2: CLarGen is a three-stage medical-grounded pipeline for CT report generation. 

the predicted pathologies from Stage 1, and col-lectively cover all high-confidence findings. Let 

B = {(ri, yi, ti)}Mi=1 denote a report collection, where ri is the report text, yi ∈ { 0, 1}C is the multi-label pathology vector for C different labels, and ti ∈ Rd a precomputed text embedding. Given a query CT, we compute an image-to-text retrieval embedding v ∈ Rd using a projector trained con-trastively with CT and text pairs, and pathology probabilities p ∈ [0 , 1] C from the LQT. To ensure the retrieved context reflects the detected patholo-gies, we compute a clinical alignment score for each report ri ∈ B :

sfind (i) = p⊤yi

∥p∥1 + ϵ − (1 − p)⊤yi

∥1 − p∥1 + ϵ , ϵ = 10 −8,

(2) which rewards agreement with high-probability findings and penalizes unlikely ones. The final ranking score combines visual similarity and clin-ical alignment, where si = 1 /2 ∗ (cos( v, ti) + 

sfind (i)) . To ensure the final k exemplars collec-tively encompass all predicted pathologies, we apply a coverage-aware greedy selection. Let 

T = {c | pc ≥ 0.5} be the set of target find-ings with weights wc = pcP  

> j∈Tpj

, we iteratively construct the set of examplars R by selecting: 

i∗ = arg max 

> i∈P\R

"

si + X

> c∈T

wc yi,c 1{c / ∈ C} 

#

,

(3) where C tracks the labels already covered by pre-vious selections, updating R ← R ∪ { i∗} and 

C ← C ∪ { c | yi∗,c = 1 }, until |R| = k.

Stage 3: Frozen LLM synthesis. The final re-port is synthesized by a frozen medical LLM (MedGemma-27B (Sellergren et al., 2025)), pre-trained on large-scale medical corpora including radiology reports. The model receives as input: (i) the predicted pathology labels of LQT from Stage 1, (ii) the retrieved exemplar reports R from Stage 2, and (iii) available patient metadata (e.g., age, sex). Conditioning on this structured clinical context, the LLM reasons over detected findings and their clinical relationships, draws on retrieved reports for appropriate terminology and reporting conventions, and generates a structured Findings section in realistic radiology style. It then produces a clinically consistent Impression by integrating the generated findings with its pretrained medical expertise. The decision to keep the LLM frozen is deliberate. Fine-tuning on a small, imbalanced dataset risks degrading the medical reasoning and clinical language capabilities acquired during large-scale pretraining. A frozen LLM also avoids learn-ing dataset-specific shortcuts that cause template collapse, as observed in fine-tuned VLMs. By re-stricting learning to Stages 1 and 2, CLarGen en-sures that the LLM operates as a genuine medical reasoning module rather than a pattern-matching predictor. 

4 Experiments 

Dataset and preprocessing. We evaluate on the CT-RATE dataset (Hamamci et al., 2026), which comprises 25,678 chest CT studies with corresponding reports, using the official train/validation/test split. For retrieval, the index is constructed exclusively from the training set; vali-dation and test samples are retrieved only from this fixed index. To prevent information leakage, any report associated with the same patient as in the query is removed from the retrieval pool. 

Models and Hyperparameters. We use a frozen 3D visual encoder HLIP (Zhao et al., 2026), and train only lightweight components: (i) a pathology-specific latent query Transformer head for multi-label classification with focal loss ( γ = 2 ), and (ii) a contrastive image-text projector used for retrieval. The medical LLM (MedGemma-27B (Sellergren et al., 2025)) is kept frozen and used only at in-ference time. All trained modules are optimized with AdamW (learning rate 6 × 10 −5, weight de-cay 0.008 ) using a cosine annealing scheduler with warmup. We train for 20 epochs with an effective batch size of 64 in mixed precision (bf16). Re-trieval uses cosine similarity in the joint embedding space with label-aware filtering, and we provide the top-k retrieved reports to the LLM (default 

k = 5 ). Unless specified otherwise, generation uses low-temperature decoding (temperature 0.2, top-p 0.9, max 512 new tokens) for stable outputs. Experiments are run on one NVIDIA H100 GPU. Computational costs are reported in Sec. A.7. 

Evaluation Metrics. We evaluate across four complementary metric groups: (i) NLP metrics quantify linguistic quality via ROUGE-L, BLEU-4, and METEOR, measuring sequence-level and n-gram overlap with references. (ii) Clinical metrics evaluate medical correctness using macro-F1, precision, recall, and the Clin-ical Report Generation (CRG) score (Hamamci et al., 2025). Following (Hamamci et al., 2026), we use their pre-trained pathology classifier based on RadBERT-RoBERTa-4m (Yan et al., 2022), to extract labels from generated text, ensuring an un-biased and standardized clinical comparison. To quantify the dependence of detection on pathol-ogy prevalence, we additionally report prevalence-stratified recall . Pathologies are split into quar-tiles by their test-set prevalence; Surv rare is the mean recall over the bottom-prevalence quartile (rare findings) and Surv common is the mean recall over the top quartile (common findings). A large gap ∆ = Surv common − Surv rare signals that the model preserves common pathologies while drop-ping rare ones, the hallmark of template-driven generation. (iii) Diversity metrics diagnose lexical and seman-tic degeneration. Distinct-1/2 (Li et al., 2016) quan-tifies lexical diversity and detect repetitive phras-ing patterns. We also report the effective n-gram vocabulary effV n = 2 Hn , where Hn is the Shan-non entropy of the corpus-level n-gram distribution. Unlike distinct-n, which counts unique types invari-ant to frequency, effV n is frequency-weighted : a corpus dominated by a handful of templates has a small effV n even if its raw count of unique n-grams is large. Intuitively, it is the equivalent number of uniformly-used n-grams that would reproduce the observed entropy. We report effV 1 (vocabulary scale) and effV 2 (local phrase / template scale). We also introduce a Normal Bias Similarity (NBS) 

score inspired by (Snell et al., 2017), computing co-sine similarity between each generated report and an embedding of normal-reference reports to de-tect semantic drift toward generic normal templates (details in Sec. A.2). te, even when pathology is present—an effect not reliably captured by surface-level diversity metrics. (iv) LLM-as-a-Judge provides a holistic evalu-ation using Gemini 2.5 (Comanici et al., 2025). Each generated report is scored against the refer-ence on five criteria scoring from 0 to 10: factual clinical accuracy, global medical coherence, im-pression quality, radiology style/formalism, and clinical safety. 

Baselines. We compare with existing publicly available open-source methods including CT-CHAT (Hamamci et al., 2026), SAMF (Hosseini et al., 2025), Reg2Rg (Chen et al., 2025a), and HULU-med (Jiang et al., 2025). CT-CHAT is a vision-language chat model for 3D chest CT vol-umes, built by coupling CT-CLIP’s vision encoder with a pretrained LLM fine-tuned on millions of question-answer pairs. SAMF fuses 2D slice-level and 3D volumetric features across multiple scales. Reg2RG enhances CT report generation by ground-ing each finding in specific anatomical regions. HULU-Med is a generalist medical VLM that sup-ports multiple input modalities across a broad range of clinical tasks. To ensure reproducibility and fa-cilitate future benchmarking, we will release the raw outputs for all models alongside our codebase. 

5 Results and Discussion 

5.1 Systematic Analysis on Template Collapse 

Our evaluation reveals a critical disconnect be-tween linguistic quality and clinical utility of cur-rent VLM paradigms. As shown in Table 1, while all VLM baselines achieve high NLP scores and Table 1: Comprehensive comparison across four complementary dimensions: (a) NLP fidelity , measuring lexical overlap with reference reports; (b) clinical correctness , evaluating pathology consistency and clinical relevance; (c) diversity and template conformity , quantifying lexical richness and tendency toward template generation; and (d) prevalence-stratified survival , assessing robustness on rare versus common pathologies. Surv rare and 

Surv common denote recall on the rarest and most common pathology quartiles, respectively, and ∆ measures the performance gap between them. Values are reported across three runs unless otherwise noted. (CRG = Clinical Report Generation score; NBS = Normal Bias Similarity; effV n = 2 Hn denotes effective n-gram vocabulary size (single run, deterministic given the model output corpus).) 

(a) NLP fidelity (b) Clinical correctness Method ROUGE-L ↑ BLEU ↑ METEOR ↑ F1 ↑ Precision ↑ Recall ↑ CRG ↑

CT-CHAT 0.382 ± 0.004 0.277 ± 0.004 0.399 ± 0.003 0.189 ± 0.010 0.493 ± 0.018 0.164 ± 0.012 0.368 ± 0.008 

HULU-Med 0.340 ± 0.006 0.239 ± 0.005 0.374 ± 0.004 0.194 ± 0.012 0.303 ± 0.015 0.166 ± 0.012 0.365 ± 0.009 

Reg2Rg 0.245 ± 0.007 0.275 ± 0.004 0.368 ± 0.004 0.185 ± 0.011 0.373 ± 0.017 0.138 ± 0.011 0.363 ± 0.010 

SAMF 0.388 ± 0.003 0.269 ± 0.004 0.388 ± 0.004 0.097 ± 0.009 0.144 ± 0.011 0.086 ± 0.008 0.355 ± 0.009 

CLarGen 0.298 ± 0.005 0.208 ± 0.005 0.335 ± 0.005 0.486 ± 0.012 0.405 ± 0.015 0.646 ± 0.014 0.472 ± 0.010 

(c) Diversity and template conformity (d) Prevalence-stratified survival Method Distinct-1 ↑ effV 1↑ Distinct-2 ↑ effV 2↑ NBS ↓ Surv rare ↑ Surv common ↑ ∆↓

Ground truth 0.016 296 0.094 2402 – 1.000 0.999 -0.001 CT-CHAT 0.002 ± 0.0002 142 0.006 ± 0.0005 392 0.877 ± 0.010 0.035 0.207 0.173 HULU-Med 0.014 ± 0.0008 230 0.080 ± 0.0030 1393 0.845 ± 0.012 0.058 0.300 0.241 Reg2Rg 0.004 ± 0.0004 151 0.018 ± 0.0012 528 0.923 ± 0.009 0.088 0.195 0.107 SAMF 0.001 ± 0.0001 114 0.002 ± 0.0002 271 0.918 ± 0.010 0.000 0.187 0.187 

CLarGen 0.011 ± 0.0007 279 0.054 ± 0.0025 1826 0.730 ± 0.015 0.628 0.622 -0.006     

> Factual Accuracy Medical Coherence Impression Quality Radiology Style Clinical Safety

4

6

8    

> Score (1-10)  CT-CHAT HULU Reg2Rg SAMF CLarGen

Figure 3: LLM-as-a-judge Evaluation. VLM baselines (grey bars) score highly on Radiology Style but drop sharply in clinical evaluation, while CLarGen (blue bars) remains high across all metrics. 

radiology formalism, their clinical performance is severely limited, with macro-F1 scores below 0.20 and low factual accuracy. The diversity anal-ysis in Table 1(c) reveals that this discrepancy is a direct result of template collapse . Most existing VLM models exhibit low Distinct-1/2 scores and high NBS scores, indicating that the models have converged to a singular, generic template with re-stricted vocabulary and high inter-report similarity. This collapse is quantified by the effective n-gram vocabulary effV n (Table 1(c)): at the bigram level, VLM baselines occupy only 271–1393 effective bigrams, an order of magnitude below the 2402 of ground-truth reports; SAMF in particular has 

effV 2 = 271 , meaning its entire test-set output is statistically equivalent to a corpus circulating fewer than 300 distinct phrases. CLarGen, by contrast, reaches 76% of the ground-truth effective bigram repertoire, confirming that decoupling perception from generation preserves both lexical breadth and usage balance. Fig. 1 visualizes this in the latent space, where VLM baselines form tight clusters that fails to capture the variance of the ground-truth report distribution. Table A.1 makes this con-crete at the case level: CT-CHAT emits a single normal-template report for 28.9% of all test cases, and SAMF for 20.8%, compared to only 0.8% in the ground truth and 1.8% in CLarGen. Appendix Table A.3 shows the same pattern: baseline out-puts require far fewer normlized templates to cover most reports, whereas CLarGen remains closer to the ground-truth distribution. HULU-Med (Jiang et al., 2025) preserves high distinct-1/2 among base-lines, yet its effV 1 and effV 2 remain below those of CLarGen, and suffers from low clinical accuracy. This degeneration coincides with low recall and comparatively higher precision, suggesting a bias toward predicting normal findings while failing to report present abnormalities. We hypothesize that under the constraints of extreme class imbalance and noisy 3D signals, next-token prediction incen-tivizes the model to ignore weak visual evidence in favor of the most statistically frequent textual patterns. Further analyses see Sec. A.5. 

5.2 Template Collapse Suppresses Rare Findings Detection 

Rare-finding suppression is the most clinically critical consequence of Template Collapse. Table 1(b) and Fig. 4 show that baselines yield high precision but low recall, with near-zero recall for many infrequent findings. This indicates a conservative failure mode, where the models maintain accuracy by generating generic normal templates and avoiding the risk of reporting abnormalities. The rare and common pathology detection decomposition in Table 1(d) makes the failure mode explicit. Across all VLM baselines, recall on the rare-pathology quartile collapses to between 0.000 (SAMF) and 0.088 (Reg2Rg), while recall on the common-pathology quartile remains an order of magnitude higher (0.19-0.30). The resulting common −rare gap ∆ ranges from 

0.11 to 0.24 . This is the conservative-template signature: by defaulting to common “normal” descriptions and avoiding rare abnormalities, baselines preserve NLP fluency at the cost of clinical accuracy. In contrast, CLarGen achieves substantially higher recall across all findings while maintaining high precision. It achieves 

Surv rare = 0.628 vs. Surv common = 0.622 ,recovering rare findings at essentially the same rate as common ones, indicating a balanced diagnostic ability. This behavior stems from the explicit decoupling of clinical perception and language generation, which forces the model to attend to weak visual signals that joint pipelines overlook, essential for robust report generation. 

5.3 CLarGen Mitigates Collapse and Improves Clinical Accuracy 

CLarGen mitigates Template Collapse by pre-serving clinical evidence during generation. It achieves a macro-F1 of 0.486 and a CRG of 0.472, outperforming all baselines (Table 1b) and achieving nearly a 150% improvement in clinical detection accuracy over the best-performing VLM baseline (HULU-Med, F1 = 0.194). Notably, CLarGen exhibits a principled trade-off: while its NLP scores are slightly lower, this indicates reduced lexical bias. By avoiding template col-lapse, CLarGen produces diverse, patient-specific reports that naturally have lower n-gram overlap with the generic normal reports that dominate the test set. This is indicated by its substantially more diverse outputs, shown as high diversity metrics (Table 1c) and widespread latent space matching the variance of the ground-truth report distribution (Fig. 1). Crucially, its NLP scores remain sufficiently high to confirm that outputs are fluent and well-structured, striking an optimal balance between clinical accuracy and linguistic fluency. The LLM-as-judge evaluation in Fig. 3 provides independent assessment from a holistic, reference-free perspective. Baselines score highly on Radiology Style , confirming they have learned the surface form of radiology reports, but drop sharply on Factual Accuracy , Medical Coherence ,and Clinical Safety : dimensions most relevant to clinical deployment. By contrast, CLarGen leads on all clinical aspects while remaining competitive on Radiology Style. This convergent evidence across automated classifiers and LLM judgment confirms CLarGen’s robust clinical gains. 

5.4 Impact of Visual Encoder Quality 

A key advantage of decoupling classification from generation is that improvements in visual repre-sentation directly translate to better report quality. We evaluate three encoders of increasing strength: CT-CLIP (Hamamci et al., 2026), Curia (Dancette et al., 2025), and HLIP (Zhao et al., 2026), under three settings: (i) a linear classifier on frozen em-beddings, measuring raw detection potential; (ii) a CT-CHAT-style LLaVA VLM fine-tuned end-to-end; and (iii) our CLarGen pipeline. As shown in Table 2, the classifier-only up-per bound improves substantially from 0.385 to 0.512 as encoder quality increases, confirming that stronger encoders carry richer pathology signals. The end-to-end VLM, however, fails to exploit this: its F1 remains nearly flat (0.184-0.193), indicating that the generation objective itself becomes the bot-tleneck. In contrast, CLarGen scales faithfully with encoder quality, rising from 0.342 to 0.486 and re-covering 89%-95% of the raw detection potential. Note that this remaining gap reflects evaluation noise rather than information loss: report-level F1 requires re-extracting labels from generated text via RadBERT, whose own classification errors impose Pleural eff. 

> Coronary calcif.
> Arterial calcif.
> Consolidation
> Cardiomegaly
> Pericardial eff.
> Atelectasis
> Emphysema
> Septal thick.
> Peribronch. thick.
> Bronchiectasis
> Lung nodule
> Fibrotic seq.
> Lymphadenop.
> Mosaic pattern
> Hiatal hernia
> Lung opacity
> Med. material

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8    

> Recall
> CT-CHAT Reg2Rg HULU SAMF ClarGen

Figure 4: Recall by pathology of generated reports from different methods. Table 2: Impact of Visual Encoder Quality. We compare the raw detection potential against the final generated report performance for different visual encoders.              

> Potentiel Report Generation F1 Visual Encoder Classifier Only Conventional VLM CLarGen (Ours) CT-CLIP 0.385 0.189 0.342 Curia 0.464 0.184 0.431 HLIP 0.512 0.193 0.486

an upper bound on any text-based metric. The near-complete recovery achieved by CLarGen therefore suggests that encoder improvements propagate al-most losslessly through our pipeline, making it straightforward to benefit from future advances in medical vision encoders. 

5.5 Ablation Studies (A) Retrieval strategy: We evaluated the contri-bution of pathology-guided retrieval by comparing CLarGen with two standard retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) baselines using the same frozen LLM: (i) visual embedding similarity (Vol ↔Vol) which retrieves K nearest reports based on cosine similarity in the visual embedding space, and (ii) joint image-text similarity (Vol ↔Text) based on the cosine similarity between the input visual em-bedding and text embeddings in a joint contrastive latent space. As shown in Table 3, these baselines achieve high NLP metrics but lower clinical ac-curacy, indicating that embedding-based retrieval often prioritizes stylistic and lexical proximity over diagnostic equivalence. By contrast, CLarGen’s pathology-guided filtering acts as a semantic judge that ensures retrieved exemplars share the predicted diagnostic profile. It also compensates for the in-herent noise brought by 3D foundation encoders, ensuring the LLM receives contextually relevant clinical evidence. These results validate that ex-plicit clinical supervision at the retrieval stage is essential to ground generation, especially for lim-ited and imbalanced 3D medical imaging. 

(B) Number of retrieved reports ( k): F1-score increases from 0.483 ( k = 4 ) to 0.489 ( k = 5 ) and 

Table 3: Retrieval and LLM conditioning ablations.                                            

> ROUGE-L ↑BLEU ↑F1 ↑CRG ↑
> Retrieval
> Vol ↔Vol 0.330 0.237 0.393 0.422 Vol ↔Text 0.347 0.263 0.446 0.439 Pathology-guided 0.298 0.208 0.486 0.472
> LLM Input
> Labels only 0.120 0.002 0.408 0.449 Image only 0.385 0.329 0.294 0.397 Exemplars only 0.324 0.190 0.417 0.440 Labels + Exemplars 0.310 0.210 0.497 0.477
> Base LLM
> LLaMA 3.1 8B 0.276 0.181 0.472 0.461 MedGemma 27B 0.298 0.208 0.486 0.472

then shows only marginal gains (0.490–0.495 for 

k ≥ 6). We therefore select k = 5 , which achieves near-optimal clinical performance while reducing prompt length and redundancy. 

(C) LLM input: The Image-only setup follows a LLaVA-style design with projected HLIP visual to-kens and LoRA fine-tuning of the LLM. It achieves reasonable NLP scores but weak clinical accuracy, suggesting limited pathology grounding from direct visual conditioning (more analyses in Sec. A.6). Labels alone perform poorly, while exemplars sub-stantially improve performance. Adding labels to exemplars further strengthens clinical accuracy. 

(D) Base LLMs: Table 3 also shows that using a domain-specific LLM (MedGemma 27B (Sell-ergren et al., 2025)) improves both clinical and NLP metrics than a general-domain LLM (LLaMA 3.1 8B (Grattafiori et al., 2024)), indicating that a domain-specific backbone is better equipped to synthesize the LQT’s clinical signals into grounded diagnostic reasoning. 

6 Conclusion 

We identified as a measurable failure mode in 3D CT report generation: autoregressive VLMs produce fluent radiology-style reports while sup-pressing patient-specific abnormalities. Our anal-ysis shows that this failure appears across clinical accuracy, output diversity, normal-template bias, dominant-template concentration, and rare-finding survival. These metrics expose a mismatch that surface-overlap scores obscure: reports can resem-ble references lexically while omitting clinically relevant findings. CLarGen mitigates this failure by separating clinical perception from language syn-thesis. A Latent Query Transformer predicts pathol-ogy evidence, pathology-guided retrieval supplies clinically matched exemplars, and a frozen medical LLM converts this structured evidence into a report. This design improves macro-F1 and rare-finding survival while preserving realistic reporting style. Additional image-input VLM analyses show that direct visual conditioning alone does not solve col-lapse; autoregressive decoders still suppress weak clinical evidence unless clinical content is made explicit before generation. These findings suggest that reliable 3D CT report generation requires ex-plicit clinical grounding rather than stronger text generation alone. Future work should improve upstream detection, validate the framework be-yond CT-RATE, and study how generated reports should communicate uncertainty-aware clinical la-bels safely. 

Limitations 

While CLarGen improves clinical grounding and reduces template collapse, several limitations re-main. Our experiments are conducted only on CT-RATE chest CT data, and broader validation across institutions, anatomies, and imaging modalities is left for future work. The retrieval module is sim-ilarly constrained by the diversity of the training corpus. Finally, CLarGen remains dependent on the quality of current 3D medical encoders. Poten-tial risks include automation bias: fluent outputs may cause radiologists to under-scrutinize missed rare findings, and distribution shift, as performance may degrade on different scanner types or patient populations not represented in the training data. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by the Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML), the German Re-search Foundation (DFG), the DAAD programme Konrad Zuse Schools of Excellence in Artificial In-telligence, sponsored by the Federal Ministry of Re-search, Technology and Space, and BMWi (project “NeuroTEMP”) research funding. We gratefully thank the scientific support and resources of the AI service infrastructure LRZ AI Systems provided by the Leibniz Supercomputing Centre (LRZ) of the Bavarian Academy of Sciences and Humanities (BAdW), funded by Bayerisches Staatsministerium für Wissenschaft und Kunst (StMWK). 

References            

> Mohammed Baharoon, Jun Ma, Congyu Fang, Augustin Toma, and Bo Wang. 2025. Exploring the design space of 3d mllms for ct report generation. In Inter-national Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention , pages 237–246. Springer. Fan Bai, Yuxin Du, Tiejun Huang, Max Q-H Meng, and Bo Zhao. 2024. M3d: Advancing 3d medical image analysis with multi-modal large language models.
> arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.00578 .Shuai Bai, Yuxuan Cai, Ruizhe Chen, Keqin Chen, Xionghui Chen, Zesen Cheng, Lianghao Deng, Wei Ding, Chang Gao, Chunjiang Ge, and 1 others. 2025. Qwen3-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21631 .Shruthi Bannur, Kenza Bouzid, Daniel C Castro, Anton Schwaighofer, Anja Thieme, Sam Bond-Taylor, Max-imilian Ilse, Fernando Pérez-García, Valentina Sal-vatelli, Harshita Sharma, and 1 others. 2024. Maira-2: Grounded radiology report generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04449 .Louis Blankemeier, Ashwin Kumar, Joseph Paul Co-hen, Jiaming Liu, Longchao Liu, Dave Van Veen, Syed Jamal Safdar Gardezi, Hongkun Yu, Magdalini Paschali, Zhihong Chen, and 1 others. 2026. Merlin: a computed tomography vision–language foundation model and dataset. Nature , pages 1–11. Hao Chen, Wei Zhao, Yingli Li, Tianyang Zhong, Yisong Wang, Youlan Shang, Lei Guo, Junwei Han, Tianming Liu, Jun Liu, and 1 others. 2024. 3d-ct-gpt: Generating 3d radiology reports through integra-tion of large vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.19330 .Zhixuan Chen, Yequan Bie, Haibo Jin, and Hao Chen. 2025a. Large language model with region-guided re-ferring and grounding for ct report generation. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging .Zhixuan Chen, Luyang Luo, Yequan Bie, and Hao Chen. 2025b. Dia-llama: Towards large language model-driven ct report generation. In International Confer-ence on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention , pages 141–151. Springer. Gheorghe Comanici, Eric Bieber, Mike Schaekermann, Ice Pasupat, Noveen Sachdeva, Inderjit Dhillon, Mar-cel Blistein, Ori Ram, Dan Zhang, Evan Rosen, and 1 others. 2025. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.06261 .

Corentin Dancette, Julien Khlaut, Antoine Saporta, He-lene Philippe, Elodie Ferreres, Baptiste Callard, Théo Danielou, Léo Alberge, Léo Machado, Daniel Tord-jman, and 1 others. 2025. Curia: A multi-modal foundation model for radiology. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.06830 .Xiwei Deng, Xianchun He, Jianfeng Bao, Yudan Zhou, Shuhui Cai, Congbo Cai, and Zhong Chen. 2025. Mvketr: chest ct report generation with multi-view perception and knowledge enhancement. IEEE Jour-nal of Biomedical and Health Informatics .Theo Di Piazza, Carole Lazarus, Olivier Nempont, and Loic Boussel. 2025. Ct-agrg: Automated abnormality-guided report generation from 3d chest ct volumes. In 2025 IEEE 22nd International Sym-posium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI) , pages 01–05. IEEE. Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, and 1 others. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783 .Yannian Gu, Wenhui Lei, Hanyu Chen, Shaoting Zhang, and Xiaofan Zhang. 2025. Interactive segmenta-tion and report generation for ct images. In Inter-national Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention , pages 273–283. Springer. Ibrahim Ethem Hamamci, Sezgin Er, and Bjoern Menze. 2024. Ct2rep: Automated radiology report genera-tion for 3d medical imaging. In Medical Image Com-puting and Computer Assisted Intervention (MICCAI) 2024, LNCS 15012 , pages 476–486. Springer. Ibrahim Ethem Hamamci, Sezgin Er, Suprosanna Shit, Hadrien Reynaud, Bernhard Kainz, and Bjoern Menze. 2025. Crg score: A distribution-aware clini-cal metric for radiology report generation. Medical Imaging with Deep Learning (MIDL) 2025 .Ibrahim Ethem Hamamci, Sezgin Er, Chenyu Wang, Furkan Almas, Ayse Gulnihan Simsek, Sevval Nil Esirgun, Irem Dogan, Omer Faruk Durugol, Ben-jamin Hou, Suprosanna Shit, and 1 others. 2026. Generalist foundation models from a multimodal dataset for 3d computed tomography. Nature Biomed-ical Engineering , pages 1–19. Abdullah Hosseini, Ahmed Ibrahim, and Ahmed Serag. 2025. From slices to volumes: Multi-scale fusion of 2d and 3d features for ct scan report generation. In International Conference on Medical Image Com-puting and Computer-Assisted Intervention , pages 268–277. Springer. Eui Jin Hwang, Jin Mo Goo, and Chang Min Park. 2025. Ai applications for thoracic imaging: considerations for best practice. Radiology , 314(2):e240650. Songtao Jiang, Yuan Wang, Sibo Song, Tianxiang Hu, Chenyi Zhou, Bin Pu, Yan Zhang, Zhibo Yang, Yang Feng, Joey Tianyi Zhou, and 1 others. 2025. Hulu-med: A transparent generalist model towards holis-tic medical vision-language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.08668 .Sunggu Kyung, Jinyoung Seo, Hyunseok Lim, Dongyeong Kim, Hyungbin Park, Jimin Sung, Jihyun Kim, Wooyoung Jo, Yoojin Nam, and Namkug Kim. 2025. Medregion-ct: region-focused multimodal llm for comprehensive 3d ct report generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.23102 .Jiwei Li, Michel Galley, Chris Brockett, Jianfeng Gao, and William B Dolan. 2016. A diversity-promoting objective function for neural conversation models. In Proceedings of the 2016 conference of the North American chapter of the association for computa-tional linguistics: human language technologies ,pages 110–119. Ruochen Li, Jun Li, Bailiang Jian, Kun Yuan, and Youx-iang Zhu. 2025. Reevalmed: Rethinking medical report evaluation by aligning metrics with real-world clinical judgment. In Proceedings of the 2025 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 11823–11837. Tsung-Yi Lin, Priya Goyal, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, and Piotr Dollár. 2017. Focal loss for dense object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision , pages 2980–2988. Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. 2023. Visual instruction tuning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:34892– 34916. Kang Liu, Zhuoqi Ma, Zikang Fang, Yunan Li, Kun Xie, and Qiguang Miao. 2026. Priorrg: Prior-guided contrastive pre-training and coarse-to-fine decoding for chest x-ray report generation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,volume 40, pages 7206–7214. Kang Liu, Zhuoqi Ma, Xiaolu Kang, Yunan Li, Kun Xie, Zhicheng Jiao, and Qiguang Miao. 2025. Enhanced contrastive learning with multi-view longitudinal data for chest x-ray report generation. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Con-ference , pages 10348–10359. Andrew Sellergren, Sahar Kazemzadeh, Tiam Jaroensri, Atilla Kiraly, Madeleine Traverse, Timo Kohlberger, Shawn Xu, Fayaz Jamil, Cían Hughes, Charles Lau, Justin Chen, Fereshteh Mahvar, Liron Yatziv, Tiffany Chen, Bram Sterling, Stefanie Anna Baby, Su-sanna Maria Baby, Jeremy Lai, Samuel Schmidgall, and 62 others. 2025. Medgemma technical report. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.05201 .Jake Snell, Kevin Swersky, and Richard Zemel. 2017. Prototypical networks for few-shot learning. Ad-vances in neural information processing systems , 30. Liwen Sun, James Jialun Zhao, Wenjing Han, and Chenyan Xiong. 2025. Fact-aware multimodal re-trieval augmentation for accurate medical radiology report generation. In Proceedings of the 2025 Con-ference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 643–655. Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, and 1 others. 2023. Llama: Open and effi-cient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971 .Chaoyi Wu, Xiaoman Zhang, Ya Zhang, Hui Hui, Yan-feng Wang, and Weidi Xie. 2025. Towards generalist foundation model for radiology by leveraging web-scale 2d&3d medical data. Nature Communications ,16(1):7866. An Yan, Julian McAuley, Xing Lu, Jiang Du, Eric Y Chang, Amilcare Gentili, and Chun-Nan Hsu. 2022. Radbert: adapting transformer-based language mod-els to radiology. Radiology: Artificial Intelligence ,4(4):e210258. Chenhui Zhao, Yiwei Lyu, Asadur Zaman Chowdury, Edward S Harake, Akhil Kondepudi, Akshay T Rao, Xinhai Hou, Honglak Lee, and Todd C Hollon. 2026. Towards scalable language-image pre-training for 3d medical imaging. Transactions on Machine Learning Research .A Appendix 

A.1 Pathology Labels 

Our pathology classifier predicts 18 thoracic find-ings commonly observed in chest CT examinations. The predicted labels are: medical material , arte-rial wall calcification , cardiomegaly , pericardial effusion , coronary artery wall calcification , hiatal hernia , lymphadenopathy , emphysema , atelectasis ,

lung nodule , lung opacity , pulmonary fibrotic se-quela , pleural effusion , mosaic attenuation pattern ,

peribronchial thickening , consolidation , bronchiec-tasis , and interlobular septal thickening .

A.2 Normal Bias Similarity (NBS) Metric 

We introduce Normal Bias Similarity (NBS) to quantify semantic drift toward generic normal-report templates, a failure mode not reliably cap-tured by surface-level diversity metrics such as distinct-n.

Formal definition. Let N = {ri}|N |  

> i=1

be a set of ground-truth reports from scans labeled as fully normal (all 18 pathology labels absent). We com-pute a normal reference embedding by averaging their sentence-level embeddings: 

¯eN = 1

|N | 

X

> ri∈N

ϕ(ri), (4) where ϕ(·) denotes a pretrained text encoder (we use the text tower of HLIP, consistent with our retrieval setup). For each generated report ˆr, NBS is then: 

NBS(ˆ r) = cos( ϕ(ˆ r), ¯eN ) . (5) We report the mean NBS over the full test set. A high mean NBS indicates that generated reports are semantically close to a prototypical normal report, regardless of the actual pathological content of the input scan—the hallmark of template collapse. 

Relationship to other diversity metrics. 

Distinct-n and effective vocabulary size (effV n)measure lexical diversity at the corpus level; they can be high even when every report describes the same normal findings using slightly varied wording. NBS is complementary: it measures semantic proximity to a specific degenerate mode (the normal template) in embedding space, and is therefore sensitive to meaning-level collapse that surface metrics miss. 

A.3 Prompt Templates 

We provide the prompts used for report generation in CLarGen. The system prompt defines the clini-cal reporting behavior and formatting constraints, while the user prompt supplies predicted pathology labels and retrieved reference reports. 

A.4 Comparison of generated reports 

We present a qualitative comparison between a ground-truth radiology report and the correspond-ing report generated by CLarGen for the same CT scan in Fig. A.2. The example is selected to illus-trate a case with multiple co-occurring pathologies spanning several severity levels, including both common findings (cardiomegaly, vascular calcifi-cation) and rarer ones (interstitial changes, consoli-dation, pleural effusion). Color coding highlights clinical findings that ap-pear in both the ground truth and the CLarGen output, grouped by finding category: green = medi-cal material / devices; orange = cardiac size; pink = vascular calcifications; yellow = pleural or peri-cardial effusion; blue = lymphadenopathy; purple = parenchymal and interstitial findings. Several observations are worth noting. First, CLarGen correctly identifies and describes all ma-jor pathological categories present in the ground truth, including the rarer interstitial and parenchy-mal findings (purple) that VLMs systematically suppress. Second, the generated report adopts real-istic radiology phrasing and structure: Findings fol-lowed by a clinically consistent Impression, with-out having been fine-tuned on the dataset. Third, while some surface-level phrasing naturally differs from the reference (as expected from a frozen LLM guided by exemplars rather than a copying mecha-nism), the clinical content is preserved with high fidelity. This stands in contrast to VLM baselines, which produce reports with higher lexical overlap to common normal templates but critically miss pathological findings, as evidenced by the quantita-tive results in Table 1. 

A.5 Additional Quantitative Analysis on Template Collapse A.5.1 Dominant Template Analysis 

Table A.1 directly visualizes template collapse by examining the most frequently generated report for each method on the 1,564-case common subset. In the ground truth, the single most common report appears only 13 times (0.8%), reflecting the natural System Prompt    

> You are an AI assistant specialized in radiology, tasked with generating clinical reports. Your writing must be indistinguishable from that of an expert human radiologist. Your task is to synthesize a report based on two sources of information: 1. Expert Findings: A definitive list of pathologies found to be
> 'present 'or 'absent 'in the scan. 2. Reference Reports: A set of reports from similar clinical cases. Operational rules: - Output only two sections: Findings : and Impressions : - Do not contradict the expert labels or invent findings. - Use the reference reports to guide vocabulary and phrasing. - Maintain concise and objective radiology style. - Avoid verbose or assistant-like language. The report is evaluated for: 1. Clinical accuracy. 2. Stylistic fidelity. Strict Output Format: Your response must only contain the Findings : and Impressions : sections.
> User Prompt Template
> Here is the information for a new CT scan. Please write the radiology report. Expert Findings for the Scan: {expert_labels} Reference Reports from Similar Cases: {top_k_reports} Your Generated Report:

Appendix Fig. A.1: Prompts used for report generation in CLarGen. 

variation expected across patient-specific findings. VLM baselines deviate strikingly from this pattern. CT-CHAT emits its most frequent template 452 times, covering 28.9% of the entire subset, and SAMF 325 times (20.8%). Crucially, both tem-plates describe an entirely normal chest: no patho-logical findings, no abnormalities. This means that for nearly one in three cases, CT-CHAT produces 

the exact same normal report regardless of what pathology is present in the scan. Combined with Surv rare scores of 0.035 and 0.000, respectively (Table 1), this confirms that template collapse is not a statistical artifact of aggregate metrics but a concrete, case-level failure. CLarGen’s most frequent output covers only 28 cases (1.8%), on par with the ground-truth ref-erence rate. Notably, even this most common CLarGen template is more conservative than those of the VLM baselines: it explicitly acknowledges diagnostic uncertainty due to the non-contrast ex-amination rather than asserting normality, reflect-ing the clinical hedging characteristic of real radi-ology practice. Sentence-level clustering gives the same qualita-tive diagnosis when exact matching underestimates reuse. RadBERT sentence clusters show that CT-CHAT and SAMF require only 39 and 34 clusters to cover 80% of generated sentences, compared with 62 for ground truth and 54 for CLarGen. This indicates that template collapse also appears as re-peated sentence-level clinical fragments, not only as exact full-report copies. 

A.5.2 NLP and clinical score correlation 

Table A.2 reports the Pearson and Spearman corre-lations between standard surface-overlap metrics and macro-F1 on the common subset. All four cor-relations are negative, showing that higher lexical Ground Truth CLarGen  

> Examination secondary to breathing movements was evaluated as suboptimal. Tracheostomy follows. Trachea, both main bronchi are open. Mediastinal main vascular structures are normal. Heart size increased. Pericardial effusion-thickening was not observed. Calcific atheroma plaques are observed in the coronary arteries and aortic arch. Pericardial effusion is present in minimal plastering style. A few lymph nodes measuring up to 15 mm are observed in the mediastinum and hilar regions. Thoracic esophagus calibration was normal and no significant tumoral wall thickening was detected. Bilateral axillary lymph node enlarged in pathological dimensions was not detected. A small amount of effusion is observed in both hemithorax, more prominent on the right. When examined in the lung parenchyma window; Clarification of interstitial signs in both lungs, budding tree images being more prominent in the lower lobe of the right lung, and an increase in density con-sistent with the consolidation of 21 mm in the basal segment of the lower lobe of the left lung are observed. CTO slightly increased in favor of the heart. There is local thickening of the pericardium. [...] Calibration of the aortic arch and other major vascular structures is natural. Calcific atheroma plaques are observed in the ascending and descend-ing aorta in the aortic arch, and in the coronary arteries. In almost all lymph node groups in the mediastinum, lymph nodes are present in the right lower paratracheal area, with a central slightly hypodense appearance. Densities that partially level in the esophagus are observed. There are lymph nodes at the hilar level. When examined in the lung parenchyma window; Both hemithorax are symmetrical. There is a catheter view inside the trachea. Consolidative areas with atelectasis-air bronchograms are observed in both lungs, extending from the basal to the apex, in the vicinity of the pleural effusion is the most promi-nent on the right and also on the left. The described findings are also observed in the upper lobe posterior segments and lower lobe superior segments in both lungs. It is recommended to be evaluated for aspiration pneumonia. There are thicken-ings in the common interlobular septa, more prominent in the upper lobes.

Appendix Fig. A.2: Qualitative comparison of a ground-truth report and the CLarGen-generated report for the same CT scan. Color coding highlights findings by category: green = devices/medical material; orange = cardiac; pink = vascular calcifications; yellow = effusions; blue = lymphadenopathy; purple = parenchymal/interstitial findings. CLarGen recovers all major pathological categories present in the ground truth, including rare interstitial and consolidative changes, using clinically appropriate terminology and report structure. 

overlap does not imply better clinical fidelity in this setting. This supports the template-collapse diag-nosis in Table 1: fluent reports can match common reference phrasing while omitting patient-specific findings. 

A.5.3 Rare-finding survival 

Table A.4 reports per-finding survival rates for the six rarest pathologies in the evaluation set, along-side the number of ground-truth positive cases (GT+) for each. The GT+ column is critical for contextualizing the severity of suppression: pericar-dial effusion, for instance, is present in 112 scans, yet SAMF and Reg2Rg achieve survival rates of ex-actly 0.000, meaning neither model mentions peri-cardial effusion in a single case across the entire test set. CT-CHAT reaches 0.009, corresponding to roughly one correct mention per 111 positive scans. CLarGen recovers a substantial fraction of these findings across all six pathologies (0.363-0.762), confirming that the decoupled detection objective directly addresses the suppression mechanism. The one relatively lower CLarGen survival, Medical material at 0.363, is consistent with the fact that medical devices are among the hardest findings to detect from volumetric features alone, as their ap-pearance is highly variable and scanner-dependent. 

A.6 Image-Input VLM Ablation: Template Collapse Under Visual Conditioning 

A natural question is whether directly conditioning the report generator on HLIP image embeddings, bypassing the discrete LQT bottleneck, would im-prove clinical completeness. We test two such vari-ants: HLIP →Qwen and HLIP →Llama , which feed frozen HLIP representations as visual tokens to Qwen2.5-VL (Bai et al., 2025) and Llama-3.2-Vision (Touvron et al., 2023), respectively, and fine-tune them to decode reports autoregressively. All models are evaluated on the same CT-RATE validation set; labels are extracted from generated reports with a RadBERT-based extractor and com-pared against the CT-RATE ground truth. The image-input VLMs are severely omission-prone: HLIP →Qwen and HLIP →Llama generate only 1.51 and 1.97 positive findings per report against 3.43 GT positives per volume, yielding macro-F1 of 0.240 and 0.316 compared with 0.497 for CLarGen. Their higher precision is a byprod-uct of suppression rather than selective clinical accuracy: Table A.6 shows that they drop 59.6– 69.3% of LQT true positives, while CLarGen pre-serves 87.9%. The diversity metrics reveal the ac-companying template-collapse pattern: over 25% of HLIP →Qwen reports are identical copies of a single template, and only 278 unique reports are Appendix Table A.1: Dominant exact templates on the 1,564-case common subset. Counts show how often the most frequent normalized report appears. CT-CHAT and SAMF repeatedly emit long normal-template reports, whereas the most frequent CLarGen report covers only 1.8% of the subset. 

Model Count Share Most frequent normalized report template 

Ground truth 13 0.8% Findings: Trachea, both main bronchi are open. Mediastinal main vascular structures, heart contour, size are normal. Tho-racic aorta diameter is normal. Pericardial effusion-thickening was not observed. Thoracic esophageal calibration was normal and no significant tumoral wall thickening was detected. [...] CT-CHAT 452 28.9% Findings: Trachea, both main bronchi are open. Mediastinal main vascular structures, heart contour, size are normal. Tho-racic aorta diameter is normal. Pericardial effusion-thickening was not observed. Thoracic esophagus calibration was normal and no significant tumoral wall thickening was detected. [...] SAMF 325 20.8% Trachea and both main bronchi were in the midline and no obstructive pathology was detected in the lumen. The medi-astinum could not be evaluated optimally in the non-contrast examination. As far as can be observed: Mediastinal main vascular structures, heart contour and size are normal. [...] CLarGen 28 1.8% Findings: Mediastinal structures were evaluated as suboptimal because the examination was unenhanced. As far as can be seen; trachea and main bronchi are open. No pathological LAP was detected in the mediastinum. The heart and mediastinal vascular structures are normal. [...] 

> Appendix Table A.2: Model-level association between surface-overlap metrics and clinical F1 on the common subset, excluding ground truth. Negative correlations indicate that higher lexical overlap does not imply better clinical fidelity.

Metric vs. F1 Pearson Spearman ROUGE-L -0.324 -0.400 BLEU-mean -0.850 -0.600 METEOR -0.914 -0.700 BLEU-4 -0.782 -0.900 needed to cover 80% of the corpus, compared with 789 for CLarGen. Figure A.3 shows the same fail-ure under increasing disease burden, where image-input VLM recall remains low even as the number of ground-truth findings grows. Visual input alone therefore does not prevent template collapse; au-toregressive report decoders still suppress weak clinical evidence unless the pipeline makes clinical content explicit before generation. 

> Appendix Table A.3: Report-level template concentra-tion on the common subset. Unique is the fraction of dis-tinct normalized reports. Top-1 and Top-5 measure cov-erage by the most frequent templates, and T80 counts templates needed to cover 80% of outputs.

Model Unique ↑ Top-1 ↓ Top-5 ↓ T80 ↑

Ground truth 0.969 0.008 0.026 1204 CT-CHAT 0.201 0.289 0.478 59 HULU-Med 0.992 0.007 0.012 1239 Reg2Rg 0.953 0.003 0.012 1179 SAMF 0.012 0.208 0.734 6CLarGen 0.698 0.018 0.056 780 

A.7 Computational Cost 

CLarGen is designed to be computationally lightweight at both training and inference time. The only trainable component is the LQT classifier, which comprises approximately 10K parameters; the HLIP encoder and MedGemma-27B are kept entirely frozen throughout training. This design makes CLarGen practical to train without requiring large-scale GPU resources or fine-tuning a genera-tive model. At inference time, CLarGen operates 0 1 2 3-4 5+ 

> GT-positive findings per scan
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> Micro recall
> LQT
> CLarGen
> HLIP-Qwen
> HLIP-Llama

Appendix Fig. A.3: Disease-burden sensitivity for image-input VLMs. As the number of ground-truth-positive findings increases, image-input VLM recall re-mains low, while CLarGen preserves substantially more positive findings. 

on precomputed HLIP image embeddings and exe-cutes the full pipeline: LQT classification, evidence retrieval, and MedGemma-27B report generation, in a mean of 1.5 seconds per report on a single NVIDIA H100 GPU, with a peak memory foot-print of approximately 90GB, dominated by the frozen MedGemma-27B backbone. These demon-strate that CLarGen achieves strong clinical report quality without sacrificing deployment efficiency. Appendix Table A.4: Rare-finding survival on the 1,564-case common subset. Survival is the fraction of ground-truth-positive (GT+) cases for which the generated report still contains the pathology according to RadBERT extraction. We present six rarest pathologies in the evaluation set. 

Pathology GT+ CT-CHAT HULU-Med Reg2Rg SAMF CLarGen Pericardial effusion 112 0.009 0.054 0.000 0.000 0.714 Interlobular septal thickening 120 0.050 0.083 0.000 0.000 0.675 Mosaic attenuation pattern 126 0.040 0.079 0.040 0.000 0.595 Medical material 157 0.006 0.076 0.191 0.000 0.363 Cardiomegaly 164 0.043 0.006 0.024 0.000 0.762 Peribronchial thickening 171 0.012 0.099 0.012 0.000 0.673 

Appendix Table A.5: Clinical and template-collapse metrics on the CT-RATE validation set. Drop rate : fraction of GT-positive labels absent from the generated report. Gen. Pos./vol : mean positive findings per report. Unique Rpt. Rate : fraction of reports that are textually distinct. Top-1 Share : fraction of volumes assigned the single most frequent report. T80 : number of unique reports needed to cover 80% of the corpus. 

Model F1 ↑ Rec. ↑ Prec. ↑ Drop ↓ Gen. P/v Uniq. % ↑ Top-1 ↓ T80 ↑

LQT (original) 0.519 0.759 0.414 0.255 6.06 — — —CLarGen 0.497 0.663 0.416 0.344 5.25 0.691 0.017 789 HLIP →Qwen 0.240 0.189 0.463 0.755 1.51 0.373 0.252 278 HLIP →Llama 0.316 0.263 0.499 0.685 1.97 0.530 0.176 530 

Appendix Table A.6: Flow decomposition relative to the LQT detector. TP keep/drop measures whether detector true positives survive in the generated report. FP propagate/correct measures whether detector false positives are repeated or removed. 

Model TP keep ↑ TP drop ↓ FP prop. ↓ FP corr. ↑

CLarGen 0.879 0.121 0.844 0.156 HLIP →Qwen 0.307 0.693 0.148 0.852 HLIP →Llama 0.404 0.596 0.213 0.787