Title: Can Continual Pre-training Bridge the Performance Gap between General-purpose and Specialized Language Models in the Medical Domain?

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.19394

Published Time: Wed, 22 Apr 2026 01:01:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# Can Continual Pre-training Bridge the Performance Gap between General-purpose and Specialized Language Models in the Medical Domain? 

Niclas Doll 1,2, Jasper Schulze Buschhoff 1, Shalaka Satheesh 1,Hammam Abdelwahab 1, Héctor Allende-Cid 1,2, Katrin Klug 11Fraunhofer IAIS, 2Lamarr Institute {niclas.doll, johann.jasper.schulze.buschoff, shalaka.satheesh}@iais.fraunhofer.de 

Abstract 

This paper narrows the performance gap be-tween small, specialized models and signifi-cantly larger general-purpose models through domain adaptation via continual pre-training and merging. We address the scarcity of spe-cialized non-English data by constructing a high-quality German medical corpus ( FineMed-de ) from FineWeb2 . This corpus is used to con-tinually pre-train and merge three well-known LLMs (ranging from 7B to 24B parameters), creating the DeFineMed model family. A com-prehensive evaluation confirms that specializa-tion dramatically enhances 7B model perfor-mance on German medical benchmarks. Fur-thermore, the pairwise win-rate analysis of the Qwen2.5 -based models demonstrates an approximately 3.5-fold increase in the win-rate against the much larger Mistral-Small-24B-Instruct through domain adaptation. This evidence positions specialized 7B models as a competitive, resource-efficient solution for complex medical instruction-following tasks. While model merging successfully restores instruction-following abilities, a subsequent failure mode analysis reveals inherent trade-offs, including the introduction of language mixing and increased verbosity, highlighting the need for more targeted fine-tuning in future work. This research provides a robust, com-pliant methodology for developing specialized LLMs, serving as the foundation for practical use in German-speaking healthcare contexts. 

1 Introduction 

Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated transformative potential across various domains, including healthcare (Paass and Giesselbach, 2023; Zhang et al., 2024). Their ability to process and generate human-like text enables applications such as diagnostics, personalized treatment plans, and efficient information retrieval (Meyer et al., 2024). However, significant gaps remain in the integration of LLMs into clinical workflows, where general-purpose models often fail to capture domain-specific knowledge and terminology with sufficient accuracy (Klug et al., 2024; Alonso et al., 2024). The effective application of LLMs in the medi-cal field faces two significant, interconnected chal-lenges. First, stringent data protection regulations necessitate on-premise solutions, making the use of large, API-based LLM services impractical and favoring smaller, computationally efficient models (Belcak et al., 2025). Second, these smaller mod-els, while being regulatory compliant, struggle to capture the complex, nuanced medical terminology due to a scarcity of high-quality, domain-specific datasets, a problem acutely felt in non-English lan-guages (German Federal Ministry of Health, 2024). This creates a critical trade-off: regulatory con-straints demand small models, underscoring the necessity of a targeted, specialized knowledge base to achieve competitive clinical performance. This work directly addresses this challenge by in-vestigating the core research question: Can domain-adaptation of 7B language models, achieved via continual pre-training and merging, close the per-formance gap sufficiently to compete with signif-icantly larger, general-purpose models on com-plex medical tasks? Beyond technical constraints, this study aims to quantify how effectively domain knowledge, gained without massive retraining, can be internalized to transform resource-efficient mod-els into viable clinical tools. This paper directly addresses these challenges by developing a specialized German medical LLM through a systematic approach to dataset creation and model adaptation, as illustrated in Figure 1. Our key contributions are as follows: • A robust and scalable filtering methodol-ogy for creating high-quality, domain-specific datasets from general-purpose corpora. This methodology combines LLM-based annota-

> arXiv:2604.19394v1 [cs.CL] 21 Apr 2026

tion with machine learning techniques and is applicable to various domains and languages. • A comprehensive evaluation, utilizing knowledge-intensive benchmarks ( MMLU-de 

and MedQA-de ) and a pairwise win-rate analysis, demonstrating that specialized 7B

models drastically close the performance gap toward 24 B models. This validates the com-petitive viability of smaller, resource-efficient LLMs, while a simultaneous failure mode analysis highlights the critical trade-offs inherent to the specialization methodology. The remainder of this paper is structured as fol-lows: Section 2 provides an overview of the state of the art. Section 3 outlines the construction of the German medical pre-training dataset. Further, Sec-tion 4 describes the model adaptation techniques employed. The evaluation methodology and results are presented in Section 5, followed by a discus-sion of the observed results in Section 6. Finally, Section 7 concludes the paper with a summary of our findings and potential future directions. 

2 Related Work 

This work intersects several key areas of research in medical LLM development, including model adap-tation through continual pre-training and model merging techniques, as well as dataset curation through document filtering. To provide a compre-hensive context, we review relevant literature in each of these domains, highlighting advancements and methodologies that align with our approach. 

2.1 Model Adaptation through Continual Pre-training 

Recent studies have explored continual pre-training as a means to adapt general-purpose LLMs to spe-cialized domains, but results remain inconsistent. Öncel et al. (2024) showed that additional pre-training can fail, or even harm performance, when domain data diverges from the model’s original distribution, underscoring the importance of cor-pus quality and alignment. In contrast, research in the legal and financial domains (Niyogi and Bhat-tacharya, 2024; Siriwardhana et al., 2024) suggests that combining continual pre-training with model merging can yield competitive improvements while preserving general reasoning capabilities. Simi-larly, Yang et al. (2024b) showed that targeted con-tinual pre-training with efficient adaptation strate-gies enhances domain fluency, suggesting that suc-cess depends less on scale and more on data selec-tion and adaptation design. 

2.2 Medical Large Language Models 

Recent progress in Medical LLMs has been achieved through pre-training (Luo et al., 2022; Peng et al., 2023), fine-tuning (Singhal et al., 2025; Toma et al., 2023; Han et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2025), and prompting (Nori et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023), yielding models that match or surpass hu-man experts on medical QA tasks (Singhal et al., 2025; Nori et al., 2023). Labrak et al. (2024) advanced this line with 

BioMistral , a continually pre-trained biomedi-cal model based on Mistral (Jiang et al., 2023) and PubMed-Central data (National Library of Medicine, 2003), outperforming open-source base-lines. Our work fundamentally differs from BioMis-tral not only in targeting the German language but in its primary research objective. Where BioMis-tral aims for performance improvements on estab-lished, knowledge-intensive benchmarks, our study investigates the competitive viability of special-ized small LMs against significantly larger general-purpose models and extends the evaluation beyond knowledge-intensive benchmarks. More recently, Zheng et al. (2025) introduced 

Apollo-2 , a multilingual medical LLM family cov-ering 50 languages, focusing on instruction-tuning and modular routing rather than continual pre-training for domain adaptation. 

2.3 Merging Large Language Models 

Model merging provides an efficient alternative to computationally expensive fine-tuning and ensem-bling by combining pre-trained LLMs fine-tuned on specialized tasks. The survey by Yang et al. (2024a) presents a taxonomy of model merging ap-proaches, their applications in various domain sub-fields, and their challenges. Additionally, Nobari et al. (2025) propose Activation-Informed Merging ,leveraging activation-space information to improve the robustness and efficiency of merging, showing up to a 40% performance gain across benchmarks. Alternative strategies further explore computa-tional efficiency and generalization. Gupta and Gupta (2024) introduce a task-vector-based ap-proach using LoRA-derived representations and geometric median aggregation, enabling effective merging with reduced computational costs. Mean-while, Yadav et al. (2024) conducted large-scale Random  

> Sampling
> Apply
> Classifier
> Fineweb2-
> de
> Supervised
> Fine-Tuning
> FineMed -
> de-260k
> Prompting-based
> Annotation Subset
> (~260k)
> Filter
> Data
> Medical
> Document
> Classifier
> Continual
> Pre-Training FineMed-
> de
> Continual
> Pre-Training
> Model
> Merging
> Instruction-Tuned
> Base LLM
> Model
> Merging
> Medical LLM Merged LLM

Figure 1: High-level illustration of the Data Filtering and Model Adaptation workflow: a subset of the German 

FineWeb2 dataset is annotated into medical and non-medical documents. The resulting annotated dataset, FineMed-de-260k , is used to train a classifier, which is then applied to the full German FineWeb2 split, producing the 

FineMed-de dataset. This dataset is subsequently used for continual pre-training - resulting in a Medical LLM -which is then merged with the initial instruction-tuned checkpoint. 

experiments, merging models up to 64B param-eters, showing that merging enhances zero-shot generalization and is particularly effective when starting from strong base models. Their findings suggest that larger models facilitate more success-ful merging, and different merging strategies per-form similarly at scale. Collectively, these works highlight the potential of model merging for creat-ing high-performing, resource-efficient LLMs. In this work, we employ Spherical Linear Inter-polation (SLERP) (Shoemake, 1985) for model merging, a technique shown by Goddard et al. (2024) to achieve the best performance in the med-ical domain. 

3 Medical Filtering Pipeline 

This section details the creation of the FineMed-de corpus. The high level process is illustrated in Figure 1. Unlike existing curation approaches that rely solely on either classical ML or LLMs, we apply a hybrid method. By using LLMs to gener-ate high-quality labels and classical ML techniques to scale the filtering process to millions of docu-ments, our approach aims to achieve both quality and efficiency in medical dataset curation. 

3.1 Source Data 

The source dataset utilized in this study is 

FineWeb2 (Penedo et al., 2024), a web-crawled dataset designed to improve accessibility for train-ing large language models. FineWeb2 is built upon 

CommonCrawl 1, encompassing a wide variety of web content including forum posts, blog articles, and news articles. The original FineWeb2 dataset 

> 1https://commoncrawl.org/

is partitioned by language using the GlotLID lan-guage classifier (Kargaran et al., 2023), with the German subset being a substantial portion, rank-ing as the third largest at 640 GB . FineWeb2 is licensed under the Open Data Commons Attribu-tion License (ODC-By) v1.0 , allowing for its open use and distribution. Our objective is to filter this subset to extract exclusively medical documents for pre-training specialized German medical LLMs. 

3.2 Medical Document Classifier 

To create a robust medical pre-training corpus, we first developed a medical document classifier. This involved constructing a supervised dataset by sam-pling approximately 260 k documents from the Ger-man FineWeb2 dataset. We then employed the 

Mixtral-8x7B-Instruct-v0.1 (Jiang et al., 2024a) model to partition these documents into medi-cal and non-medical categories using a zero-shot prompting approach. At the time of our study, this model offered a combination of strong multilingual performance and computational efficiency, making it a practical choice for our classification task. The prompt used is provided in Appendix A.1. The output of the LLM was validated through manual inspection of 100 random samples by three human annotators, yielding an F1 score of 91 .1 ± 2.5. The manual inspection process and further evaluation of the LLM’s performance is detailed in Appendix A.1. The resulting labeled dataset, named FineMed-de-260k , was then randomly split into training and testing sets, as detailed in Table 1. To achieve a cost-effective and scalable solution for classifying the entire pre-training corpus, we train a significantly smaller and more efficient clas-#Documents #Words Med Other Med Other 

Test 4.9k 21 .5k 8.7M 20 .3M

Train 44 .1k 193 .5k 81 .9M 181 .8M

Total 49 .0k 215 .0k 90 .6M 202 .1M 

> Table 1: Label distribution between medical (Med) and non-medical (Other) domains of the FineMed-de-260k
> dataset in terms of number of documents and words.

Dataset #Documents #Words 

FineMed-de 7.3M 5.1B

FineWeb2-de 427 .7M 234 .8B    

> Table 2: Dataset size of FineMed-de compared to the original FineWeb2-de in number of documents and num-ber of words.

sifier based on this annotated dataset. Specifically, we fine-tune a 279 M parameter xlm-roberta model (Conneau et al., 2020) as a medical document clas-sifier, achieving a precision of 0.95 and recall of 

0.8 on the test set. Details of the training procedure can be found in Appendix A.2. 

3.3 Medical Pre-Training Corpus 

The application of the classifier to the entire Ger-man FineWeb2 dataset required approximately 400 

GPU hours, distributed across 8 A100 (40GB) GPUs on the Karolina cluster. 2 The resulting dataset, which we named FineMed-de , contains roughly 7.3 million documents. The statistics of the resulting dataset are presented in Table 2. 

4 Model Adaptation 

To create specialized German medical LLMs, we select three source models for adaptation via contin-ual pre-training and model merging. We name this family of adapted models DeFineMed , a combina-tion of "De" for German and FineMed , our dataset used for continual pre-training. The decision to start from instruction-tuned models for our adapta-tion process is motivated by both methodological precedent and empirical evidence. Following the setup of the BioMistral model family (Labrak et al., 2024), which also relies on instruction-tuned check-points as the basis for continual pre-training and model merging, we adopt a similar strategy to en-sure alignment with established practices in the domain. At the same time, we acknowledge that the optimal sequencing of instruction tuning and 

> 2https://www.it4i.cz/en/infrastructure/ karolina

continual pre-training remains an open research question, with recent studies reporting conflicting findings on whether instruction tuning should pre-cede or follow domain adaptation (Jindal et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2024b). 

4.1 Source Models 

The foundation of our model adaptation process is the selection of appropriate source models. We prioritize models with strong multilingual capabili-ties to establish a robust base for understanding and generating text in our target language. Specifically, we focus on Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct and Mistral-7B-Instruct , both of which offer a balance between performance and computational efficiency within the 7B parameter range. To investigate how our process scales with model size, we also included 

Mistral-Small-24B-Instruct with 23.6B parameters. The complete list of models used in this work is provided in the Table 3. 

4.2 Continual Pre-training 

To adapt the source models to the medical do-main, we perform continual pre-training using the 

FineMed-de dataset from Section 3. We leverage the Hugging Face Transformers library (Wolf et al., 2020) alongside the Accelerate library (Gugger et al., 2022) for efficient distributed training. To optimize both memory usage and computational performance, we incorporate several advanced tech-niques such as Fully Sharded Data Parallelism 

(FSDP) (Zhao et al., 2023), Flash Attention (Dao, 2023), Activation Checkpointing , Sequence Pack-ing (Ding et al., 2024), and mixed-precision train-ing with bfloat16 . We train all models for a to-tal of two epochs using the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov and Hutter, 2019) with a linear learn-ing rate decay. In order to address training instabil-ities, we implement an extended warmup phase of 

500 steps. A detailed description of the pre-training procedure is given in Appendix A.3. 

4.3 Model Merging 

Inspired by the observations from Labrak et al. (2024), where merging models led to improved performance in various tasks, we employ model merging after training. Following continual pre-training, we apply model merging to mitigate catas-trophic forgetting and restore instruction-following abilities. By merging it with its original instruction-tuned version we expect to recover the instruction-following ability (Yang et al., 2024a). Each con-Model Parameters Vocab Size License Source 

Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3 7.25 B 32 k Apache-2.0 (Jiang et al., 2023) Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct 7.62 B 152 k Apache-2.0 (Qwen et al., 2025) Mistral-Small-24B-Instruct 23 .6B 131 k Apache-2.0 (Mistral AI, 2025) 

> Table 3: Source model information, including model size, vocabulary size, license citations.

tinually pre-trained model is merged with its cor-responding instruction-tuned base model using the Mergekit framework (Goddard et al., 2024). We employ SLERP (Shoemake, 1985), which has been shown to outperform alternative strategies in the medical domain (Goddard et al., 2024), follow-ing the layer-wise, component-specific interpola-tion schedule proposed by Lu et al. (2025). The full merging configuration is provided in Appendix A.4. This approach provides an efficient means of preserving generalization capabilities without additional fine-tuning. 

5 Evaluation 

This chapter presents a comprehensive evalua-tion of the model checkpoints across three dimen-sions: benchmark performance, pairwise competi-tive analysis, and quantitative failure mode assess-ment. Our analysis systematically investigates the impact of continual pre-training and model merg-ing on both domain-specific accuracy and output quality. We use BioMistral as a comparative baseline throughout our evaluation due to its similar domain adaptation technique. Apollo-2 is excluded as a direct baseline due to its focus on instruction-tuning as its primary specialization mechanism. 

5.1 Knowledge-Intensive Benchmark Evaluation 

We evaluate model performance across three check-points for each selected source model—the ini-tial instruction-tuned model, the continually pre-trained model, and the final merged model. Perfor-mance is assessed using the LM Evaluation Har-ness (Gao et al., 2024; Biderman et al., 2024) on two established medical benchmarks: (1) 

MMMLU , specifically focusing on the German medical tasks (Anatomy, Clinical Knowledge, and College Medicine), and (2) MedQA-de , a machine-translated German version of the MedQA dataset (Jin et al., 2021) consisting of 500 medical exam questions. To ensure that domain adaptation does not compromise general reasoning or linguistic ca-pabilities, we additionally evaluate all models on a set of general knowledge benchmarks, with the corresponding results reported in Appendix A.6 and in Table 4. Base Models achieve very different performance across the benchmarks. Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct out-performs the Mistral-7B-Instruct model by 9.34% 

on average across all benchmarks, likely due to more modern data pipelines and pre-training methodologies. Notably, the Mistral-Small-24B-Instruct model achieves the best overall results, demonstrating a significant increase in perfor-mance, particularly on MedQA-de , where it out-performs the second-best model by 18 .60% . We observed that even our weakest base model outper-forms the BioMistral baseline on three out of four benchmarks. This is likely due to the primarily English corpus used to adapt the model. Continual Pre-Training on domain-specific data consistently improves performance across multilin-gual models. DeFineMed-Mistral-7B exhibits the strongest relative performance increase from con-tinual pre-training, with an average improvement of 

6.61% . DeFineMed-Mistral-Small-24B also bene-fits from continual pre-training, though to a lesser extent than smaller models, with an average gain of 

1.57% . The impact of using domain-specific data is validated through an ablation study designed to isolate and quantify the benefit of our medical cor-pus compared to an unfiltered baseline, as detailed in Section A.5. Model Merging shows mixed results. While it consistently improved performance on the MedQA 

benchmark and showed consistent, though in some cases marginal, gains for the DeFineMed-Mistral-Small-24B-SLERP model, other combinations of models and benchmarks did not reflect a clear trend. For instance, the performance of DeFineMed-Qwen2.5-7B on the Clinical Knowledge and Col-lege Medicine benchmarks dropped after merg-ing. On average, model merging slightly im-proved performance across the benchmarks, offer-ing the advantage of partially restoring instruction-following abilities that were lost during continual Model Anatomy Clinical Knowledge College Medicine MedQA-de Average                                                        

> BioMistral-7B (baseline) 44.44 ± 4.29 52.08 ± 3.07 40.46 ± 3.74 37.20 ± 2.16 43.55 ± 1.70 BioMistral-7B-SLERP (baseline) 45.93 ± 4.30 58.49 ± 3.03 50.87 ± 3.81 37.60 ± 2.17 48.22 ± 1.71 Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3 42.22 ± 4.27 61.13 ± 3.00 53.18 ± 3.80 42.40 ± 2.21 49.73 ± 1.71 DeFineMed-Mistral-7B 57.78 ± 4.27 65.28 ± 2.93 55.49 ± 3.79 46.80 ± 2.23 56.34 ± 1.70 DeFineMed-Mistral-7B-SLERP 53.33 ± 4.31 65.66 ± 2.92 56.65 ± 3.78 50.20 ± 2.24 56.46 ± 1.70 Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct 54.07 ± 4.30 69.06 ± 2.85 63.01 ± 3.68 50.20 ± 2.24 59.08 ± 1.68 DeFineMed-Qwen2.5-7B 62.22 ± 4.19 76.60 ± 2.61 68.21 ± 3.55 52.60 ± 2.24 64.91 ± 1.62 DeFineMed-Qwen2.5-7B-SLERP 65.19 ± 4.12 75.85 ± 2.63 65.90 ± 3.61 54.20 ± 2.23 65.28 ± 1.62 Mistral-Small-24B-Instruct 66.67 ± 4.07 78.87 ± 2.51 73.41 ± 3.37 68.80 ± 2.07 71.94 ± 1.55 DeFineMed-Mistral-Small-24B 68.15 ± 4.02 79.62 ± 2.48 77.46 ± 3.19 68.80 ± 2.07 73.51 ± 1.52 DeFineMed-Mistral-Small-24B-SLERP 68.89 ± 4.00 82.64 ± 2.33 78.03 ± 3.16 70.20 ± 2.05 74.94 ± 1.49

Table 4: Model performance on different German benchmarks in one-shot setting. The average accuracy is the unweighted mean of accuracies, whereas the standard error of the average is the square root of the unweighted mean of variances. Best score per model family is underlined. 

pre-training. In terms of overall performance, DeFineMed-Mistral-Small-24B-SLERP emerges as the strongest model, achieving an average accuracy of 

74 .94% and significantly outperforming all other models. Notably, DeFineMed-Qwen2.5-7B-SLERP 

demonstrates exceptionally strong performance for its size, performing comparably to the much larger non-specialized Mistral-Small-24B-Instruct 

model on the Anatomy and Clinical Knowledge 

benchmarks. 

5.2 Pairwise Win-Rate Evaluation 

This section presents the comparative performance of model checkpoints through pairwise win-rate analysis, quantified using the LLM-as-a-Judge methodology using GPT-4.1-mini (OpenAI, 2025) on a machine-translated version of the MedAlpaca 

dataset (Han et al., 2025). The evaluation prompts are provided in Appendix A.7. Given the require-ment for instruction-following abilities, our analy-sis concentrates on the base instruction-tuned mod-els and the final merged checkpoints. The results are summarized in Figure 2. The analysis confirms that model scale is the most sig-nificant determinant of output quality. The two 

24 B models overwhelmingly dominate all 7B mod-els, establishing a high performance ceiling for the task. Domain adaptation is highly successful in the 

7B range. Pairwise comparisons show that the merged checkpoints consistently and significantly outperform their instruction-tuned base counter-parts. For instance, DeFineMed-Qwen2.5-7B-SLERP wins against Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct by a rate of 0.66 versus 0.33 . This validates model merging as a highly effective technique for applying domain knowledge while retaining core instruction capa-bilities at this scale. Among the 7B models, the 

Qwen2.5 architecture demonstrates superior base performance over the Mistral architecture. Crucially, specialization drastically closes the performance gap toward the largest model. The merged DeFineMed-Qwen2.5-7B-SLERP model achieves a win-rate of 0.31 against the much larger 

Mistral-Small-24B-Instruct , representing a signifi-cant, 3.5-fold increase from the base Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct win-rate of 0.09 against the same model. This demonstrates that the fusion of domain knowl-edge makes the smaller 7B model substantially more competitive against 24 B models. Conversely, the applied domain adaptation tech-nique proved detrimental at the 24 B scale, where the base Mistral-Small-24B-Instruct model outper-forms its merged counterpart. This suggests that the performance drop of larger models may be partly attributable to limitations in the applied merging method, although additional factors related to large-scale adaptation cannot be excluded. 

5.3 Quantitative Evaluation of Failure Modes 

This section presents a quantitative analysis of model output quality by analyzing failure modes. We again make use of the machine-translated ver-sion of the MedAlpaca dataset (Han et al., 2025) and employ GPT-4.1 to systematically quantify fail-ure modes of LLM responses (see Appendix A.7 for the prompt template). Specifically, we analyze the frequency of failure modes including language mixing, typos, contradiction, hallucination and ver-bosity among others (see Table 10 in the appendix for detailed descriptions). Figure 3 summarizes the distribution of these failure modes across the selected model checkpoints. Overall, the results in-Figure 2: Matrix of model win-rates on the German  

> MedAlpaca dataset, where the value represents the win-rate of the row model over the column model in a head-to-head comparison.

dicate that specialization via continual pre-training and subsequent model merging often mitigates a majority of common failure modes. Across the Mistral-7B and Qwen2.5-7B families, a clear trend of mitigation is observed in failure modes such as hallucination, omission, overgener-alization, and repetition after the merging step. Fur-thermore, the integration of domain knowledge via merging significantly improves the models’ epis-temic calibration. Both overconfidence and con-tradiction errors are dramatically reduced. This suggests the specialized models are less likely to confidently state incorrect or conflicting informa-tion, leading to more factually grounded outputs. Conversely, pre-training and merging can pro-mote or introduce specific failure modes. The most extreme case is the language mixing failure mode in the DeFineMed-Mistral-7B-SLERP model, which exhibited 207 of the 216 instances, a drastic in-crease from the 12 instances in the base Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3 . This phenomenon aligns with prior qualitative observations and indicates a strong, yet localized, negative impact of multilingual domain adaptation on language separation. However, this trend is not observed in the Qwen2.5-7B models. We also observe an inverse relationship between omission and verbosity among the 7B models. The desire to be more comprehensive (reducing omis-sion) often results in outputs that are significantly more verbose. This increase in verbosity is ex-pected, as the models were continually pre-trained on a rich, verbose corpus of specialized text. The merging technique is not potent enough to fully counteract this learned behavior, suggesting that more involved instruction-tuning methods may be necessary to shape the desired output. The occurrence of typos showed a contradictory pattern: a drastic decrease from 118 to 41 for the 

Qwen2.5-7B family following specialization and merging, but a drastic increase from 85 to 125 for the Mistral-7B family. This suggests that the im-pact on low-level language fluency is highly depen-dent on the underlying base model. Finally, the 24 B model family demonstrates re-markable stability. The failure mode counts for the merged checkpoint show no significant changes from its base model counterpart, with all counts remaining low. This observation is consistent with findings that larger models are more robust to failure modes introduced during post-pre-training adaptation, including perturbations from parameter merging or fine-tuning (Wei et al., 2022; Yadav et al., 2024). 

6 Discussion 

A key element enabling our results is the construc-tion of a large-scale German medical pre-training corpus from the FineWeb2 dataset , achieved through a combination of LLM-based filtering and traditional ML techniques. This process directly addresses the limited availability of high-quality datasets and provides the necessary knowledge foundation for small model effectiveness. The evidence from our evaluation directly ad-dresses the question of whether small, domain-adapted models can challenge the performance of significantly larger counterparts. While a fully de-cisive answer requires further investigation, our findings represent a major step forward, demon-strating that the 7B models, enhanced via continual pre-training and merging, significantly closed the knowledge and performance gap against the 24 B

model. In our quantitative benchmark analysis, the 

DeFineMed-Qwen2.5-7B-SLERP model demon-strated performance comparable to the much larger 

Mistral-Small-24B-Instruct on three out of four domain-specific benchmarks. More critically, the pairwise win-rate evaluation quantified this compet-itive gain: the specialization and merging process enabled the DeFineMed-Qwen2.5-7B-SLERP to in-crease its win-rate against the Mistral-Small-24B-Instruct by approximately 3.5-fold. This marked reduction in the performance disparity supports the Figure 3: Frequency count of distinct failure modes for base instruction-tuned and merged models, quantified using      

> GPT-4.1 methodology on 216 instances from the German-translated MedAlpaca dataset.

viability of adopting smaller, specialized models as a competitive, resource-efficient alternative to de-ploying large, general-purpose models for complex medical instruction-following tasks. Notably, the magnitude of improvement differs between the two evaluation strategies, highlight-ing an important distinction in what each cap-tures. While knowledge-intensive benchmarks measure absolute factual performance in a con-trolled, closed-ended setting, the pairwise win-rate evaluation additionally captures dimensions such as completeness, clarity, and practical helpfulness, reflecting real-world open-ended interactions more closely. The 7B Qwen2.5 model narrowed the av-erage knowledge benchmark gap by nearly 2-fold, confirming that domain adaptation can yield sub-stantial gains across both evaluation paradigms. Despite the successful performance gains, the specialization process highlighted critical trade-offs and limitations of the current techniques. The benchmark evaluation demonstrated that model merging, while successfully restoring instruction-following, yielded only marginal average improve-ments and inconsistent benefits, suggesting that merging alone is insufficient to fully harness the potential of domain-adapted checkpoints. The quantitative analysis of failure modes fur-ther detailed these shortcomings. While specializa-tion effectively mitigated factual errors like hallu-cination and overconfidence, it introduced mode-specific failures, most notably language mixing and increased verbosity due to the nature of pre-training. These findings underscore the inherent trade-off be-tween domain adaptation and instruction-following fidelity. Furthermore, at the 24 B scale, the merged model underperformed relative to the base model. This negative result may stem from several factors, including scale sensitivity of the SLERP merging method or hyperparameter configurations that were not specifically optimized for larger models. This highlights that CPT combined with SLERP merg-ing is not guaranteed to improve performance at larger scales and underscores the need for scale-aware adaptation strategies. Collectively, these findings highlight that merging must be comple-mented by more targeted instruction-tuning tech-niques to fully harness the potential of specialized models. 

7 Conclusion 

In this paper, we successfully demonstrated a sys-tematic approach to creating specialized German medical large language models, addressing the core question of whether small, resource-efficient mod-els can be adapted to compete with significantly larger, general-purpose counterparts. Our approach involved the creation of FineMed-de , a large-scale German medical dataset, which was then used to successfully adapt three state-of-the-art LLMs ranging from 7B to 24 B param-eters. Our comprehensive evaluation confirmed the competitive viability of the 7B models. The pairwise win-rate analysis was particularly deci-sive, showing that domain adaptation and subse-quent merging enabled the Qwen2.5 -based 7B

model to achieve an approximately 3.5-fold in-crease in its win-rate against the Mistral-Small-24B-Instruct model. These results confirm that well-adapted smaller models represent a competi-tive and resource-efficient alternative for environ-ments constrained by computation and regulation. However, the evaluation also revealed critical trade-offs. While model merging successfully re-stored instruction-following capabilities, our fail-ure mode analysis highlighted side effects such as language mixing and increased verbosity. These findings suggest that merging alone is insufficient to fully realize the potential of domain-adapted models. Moving forward, future research should prioritize domain-specific instruction tuning to mit-igate the observed failure modes. 

Limitations 

Despite the advancements achieved through contin-ual pre-training and model merging, several limi-tations must be considered when interpreting the results. One key limitation is the pre-training corpus, which was derived from FineWeb2 by filtering for German medical content. While this approach al-lowed us to construct a domain-specific dataset tailored to our needs, it also means that the dataset inherits the limitations of FineWeb2 . These include potential biases, misinformation, and the presence of harmful content. Notably, these issues persist de-spite the existing filtering efforts of the FineWeb2 

authors, highlighting the challenges of fully elim-inating such limitations. Consequently, our work inherits these limitations. Another challenge lies in the process of model merging. While merging helped restore the instruction-following abilities that were lost during continual pre-training, its benefits were not consis-tent across different tasks. Moreover, the merging process introduced new failure modes. These unin-tended side effects underscore the need for further refinement after model merging to ensure more reliable and predictable improvements in model performance. In addition, our evaluation primarily utilized the German subsets of two established bench-marks: MMMLU and MedQA . However, certain components, such as the College Medicine task in 

MMMLU , are known to contain a significant pro-portion of incorrectly labeled samples (Gema et al., 2025). Furthermore, a key limitation of this study is our reliance on machine-translated benchmarks, due to the lack of publicly available, expert-curated German medical QA datasets, a common challenge in multilingual LLM evaluation (Bijl de Vroe et al., 2025). While the pairwise win-rate and failure mode analyses provide valuable insights into relative model behavior and output quality, they also en-tail several limitations. First, the LLM-as-a-Judge evaluation relies on GPT-4.1-mini as the scoring model, which introduces potential bias and may not perfectly align with human judgment, particu-larly for multilingual or domain-specific content. Furthermore, pairwise comparisons capture rela-tive preference, not absolute accuracy, and may favor stylistic similarity to the judge model over true factual correctness. Second, the failure mode quantification depends on automated classification of response types, which may not fully capture nuanced language or reasoning mistakes. The anal-ysis is also limited by the scope of the MedAlpaca 

dataset, which may not capture the full range of medical or general instruction-following scenar-ios. Future work should include human expert evaluations, cross-judge consistency checks, and domain-specific annotation frameworks to validate and extend these findings. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was done within the project SmartHos-pital.NRW with grant number 005-2011-0041/2 and project number 2011ki001b, funded by the Ministry for Economic Affairs, Industry, Climate Action and Energy of the State of North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany. We thank the reviewers for their valuable feedback. 

References    

> Iñigo Alonso, Maite Oronoz, and Rodrigo Agerri. 2024. Medexpqa: Multilingual benchmarking of large lan-guage models for medical question answering. Artifi-cial Intelligence in Medicine , 155:102938. Peter Belcak, Greg Heinrich, Shizhe Diao, Yonggan Fu, Xin Dong, Saurav Muralidharan, Yingyan Ce-line Lin, and Pavlo Molchanov. 2025. Small lan-guage models are the future of agentic ai. Preprint ,arXiv:2506.02153. Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Lintang Sutawika, Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Baber Abbasi, Alham Fikri Aji, Pawan Sasanka Ammanamanchi, Sidney Black, Jordan Clive, Anthony DiPofi, Julen Etxaniz, Ben-jamin Fattori, Jessica Zosa Forde, Charles Foster, Jef-frey Hsu, Mimansa Jaiswal, Wilson Y. Lee, Haonan Li, and 11 others. 2024. Lessons from the trenches on reproducible evaluation of language models. Sander Bijl de Vroe, George Stampoulidis, Kai Hakala, Aku Rouhe, Mark van Heeswijk, and Jussi Karl-gren. 2025. Comparing human and machine trans-lations of generative language model evaluation

datasets. In Proceedings of the Joint 25th Nordic Conference on Computational Linguistics and 11th Baltic Conference on Human Language Technologies (NoDaLiDa/Baltic-HLT 2025) , pages 80–85, Tallinn, Estonia. University of Tartu Library. Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, and Oyvind Tafjord. 2018. Think you have solved question answering? try arc, the ai2 reasoning challenge. 

Preprint , arXiv:1803.05457. Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman. 2021. Training verifiers to solve math word prob-lems. Preprint , arXiv:2110.14168. Alexis Conneau, Kartikay Khandelwal, Naman Goyal, Vishrav Chaudhary, Guillaume Wenzek, Francisco Guzmán, Edouard Grave, Myle Ott, Luke Zettle-moyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2020. Unsuper-vised cross-lingual representation learning at scale. 

Preprint , arXiv:1911.02116. Tri Dao. 2023. Flashattention-2: Faster attention with better parallelism and work partitioning. Preprint ,arXiv:2307.08691. Hantian Ding, Zijian Wang, Giovanni Paolini, Varun Kumar, Anoop Deoras, Dan Roth, and Stefano Soatto. 2024. Fewer truncations improve language modeling. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.10830 .DiscoResearch, Occiglot, DFKI, and hessian.Ai. 2024. Llama3-german-8b: A german language model based on meta’s llama3-8b. https://huggingface.co/ DiscoResearch/Llama3-German-8B . Accessed: 2025-03-11. Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Baber Abbasi, Stella Bider-man, Sid Black, Anthony DiPofi, Charles Foster, Laurence Golding, Jeffrey Hsu, Alain Le Noac’h, Haonan Li, Kyle McDonell, Niklas Muennighoff, Chris Ociepa, Jason Phang, Laria Reynolds, Hailey Schoelkopf, Aviya Skowron, Lintang Sutawika, and 5 others. 2024. A framework for few-shot language model evaluation. Aryo Pradipta Gema, Joshua Ong Jun Leang, Gi-won Hong, Alessio Devoto, Alberto Carlo Maria Mancino, Rohit Saxena, Xuanli He, Yu Zhao, Xi-aotang Du, Mohammad Reza Ghasemi Madani, Claire Barale, Robert McHardy, Joshua Harris, Jean Kaddour, Emile van Krieken, and Pasquale Min-ervini. 2025. Are we done with mmlu? Preprint ,arXiv:2406.04127. German Federal Ministry of Health. 2024. Machbarkeit einer deutschen mimic. https: //www.bundesgesundheitsministerium.de/ service/publikationen/details/mimic.html .Accessed: 2025-03-11. Charles Goddard, Shamane Siriwardhana, Malikeh Ehghaghi, Luke Meyers, Vladimir Karpukhin, Brian Benedict, Mark McQuade, and Jacob Solawetz. 2024. Arcee’s MergeKit: A toolkit for merging large lan-guage models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Confer-ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Industry Track , pages 477–485, Miami, Florida, US. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Sylvain Gugger, Lysandre Debut, Thomas Wolf, Philipp Schmid, Zachary Mueller, Sourab Mangrulkar, Marc Sun, and Benjamin Bossan. 2022. Accelerate: Train-ing and inference at scale made simple, efficient and adaptable. https://github.com/huggingface/ accelerate .Siddharth Gupta and Aakash Gupta. 2024. Model merg-ing using geometric median of task vectors. In LLM Merging Competition at NeurIPS 2024 .Tianyu Han, Lisa C. Adams, Jens-Michalis Papaioan-nou, Paul Grundmann, Tom Oberhauser, Alexei Figueroa, Alexander Löser, Daniel Truhn, and Keno K. Bressem. 2025. Medalpaca – an open-source collection of medical conversational ai models and training data. Preprint , arXiv:2304.08247. Tianyu Han, Lisa C. Adams, Jens-Michalis Papaioan-nou, Paul Grundmann, Tom Oberhauser, Alexander Löser, Daniel Truhn, and Keno K. Bressem. 2023. Medalpaca – an open-source collection of medical conversational ai models and training data. Preprint ,arXiv:2304.08247. Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andrew Critch, Jerry Li, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2021a. Aligning ai with shared human values. Pro-ceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob Stein-hardt. 2021b. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. Proceedings of the International Con-ference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Men-sch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guil-laume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, Lélio Renard Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. 2023. Mistral 7b. Preprint ,arXiv:2310.06825. Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Antoine Roux, Arthur Mensch, Blanche Savary, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Emma Bou Hanna, Florian Bressand, Gi-anna Lengyel, Guillaume Bour, Guillaume Lam-ple, Lélio Renard Lavaud, Lucile Saulnier, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Sandeep Subramanian, Sophia Yang, and 7 others. 2024a. Mixtral of experts. 

Preprint , arXiv:2401.04088. Zhengbao Jiang, Zhiqing Sun, Weijia Shi, Pedro Ro-driguez, Chunting Zhou, Graham Neubig, Xi Lin, Wen-tau Yih, and Srini Iyer. 2024b. Instruction-tuned language models are better knowledge learners. In 

Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 5421–5434, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Di Jin, Eileen Pan, Nassim Oufattole, Wei-Hung Weng, Hanyi Fang, and Peter Szolovits. 2021. What disease does this patient have? a large-scale open domain question answering dataset from medical exams. Ap-plied Sciences , 11(14). Ishan Jindal, Chandana Badrinath, Pranjal Bharti, Lakkidi Vinay, and Sachin Dev Sharma. 2024. Bal-ancing continuous pre-training and instruction fine-tuning: Optimizing instruction-following in llms. 

Preprint , arXiv:2410.10739. Amir Hossein Kargaran, Ayyoob Imani, François Yvon, and Hinrich Schütze. 2023. GlotLID: Language iden-tification for low-resource languages. In The 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing .Katrin Klug, Katharina Beckh, Dario Antweiler, Nilesh Chakraborty, Giulia Baldini, Katharina Laue, René Hosch, Felix Nensa, Martin Schuler, and Sven Gies-selbach. 2024. From admission to discharge: a sys-tematic review of clinical natural language processing along the patient journey. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making , 24(1):238. Yanis Labrak, Adrien Bazoge, Emmanuel Morin, Pierre-Antoine Gourraud, Mickael Rouvier, and Richard Dufour. 2024. Biomistral: A collection of open-source pretrained large language models for medical domains. Preprint , arXiv:2402.10373. Zhengliang Liu, Yue Huang, Xiaowei Yu, Lu Zhang, Zihao Wu, Chao Cao, Haixing Dai, Lin Zhao, Yi-wei Li, Peng Shu, Fang Zeng, Lichao Sun, Wei Liu, Dinggang Shen, Quanzheng Li, Tianming Liu, Da-jiang Zhu, and Xiang Li. 2023. Deid-gpt: Zero-shot medical text de-identification by gpt-4. Preprint ,arXiv:2303.11032. Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. 2019. De-coupled weight decay regularization. Preprint ,arXiv:1711.05101. Wei Lu, Rachel K. Luu, and Markus J. Buehler. 2025. Fine-tuning large language models for domain adap-tation: exploration of training strategies, scaling, model merging and synergistic capabilities. npj Com-putational Materials , 11(1):84. Renqian Luo, Liai Sun, Yingce Xia, Tao Qin, Sheng Zhang, Hoifung Poon, and Tie-Yan Liu. 2022. Biogpt: generative pre-trained transformer for biomedical text generation and mining. Briefings in Bioinformatics , 23(6). Annika Meyer, Janik Riese, and Thomas Streichert. 2024. Comparison of the performance of gpt-3.5 and gpt-4 with that of medical students on the written ger-man medical licensing examination: Observational study. JMIR Med Educ , 10:e50965. Team Mistral AI. 2025. Mistral small 3: Apache 2.0, 81% mmlu, 150 tokens/s. https://mistral.ai/ news/mistral-small-3 . Accessed: 2025-03-11. Niklas Muennighoff, Alexander Rush, Boaz Barak, Teven Le Scao, Nouamane Tazi, Aleksandra Piktus, Sampo Pyysalo, Thomas Wolf, and Colin A Raffel. 2023. Scaling data-constrained language models. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 36, pages 50358–50376. Curran Associates, Inc. National Library of Medicine. 2003. Pmc open access subset. https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/tools/ openftlist/ . [cited 2025 03 14]. Mitodru Niyogi and Arnab Bhattacharya. 2024. Paramanu-ayn: Pretrain from scratch or continual pretraining of llms for legal domain adaptation? 

Preprint , arXiv:2403.13681. Amin Heyrani Nobari, Kaveh Alimohammadi, Ali Ar-jomandBigdeli, Akash Srivastava, Faez Ahmed, and Navid Azizan. 2025. Activation-informed merging of large language models. Preprint , arXiv:2502.02421. Harsha Nori, Yin Tat Lee, Sheng Zhang, Dean Carignan, Richard Edgar, Nicolo Fusi, Nicholas King, Jonathan Larson, Yuanzhi Li, Weishung Liu, Renqian Luo, Scott Mayer McKinney, Robert Osazuwa Ness, Hoi-fung Poon, Tao Qin, Naoto Usuyama, Chris White, and Eric Horvitz. 2023. Can generalist foundation models outcompete special-purpose tuning? case study in medicine. Preprint , arXiv:2311.16452. OpenAI. 2025. Introducing GPT-4.1 in the API. https: //openai.com/index/gpt-4-1/ . Accessed: 2025-10-07. Gerhard Paass and Sven Giesselbach. 2023. Foundation Models for Natural Language Processing . Springer. Guilherme Penedo, Hynek Kydlíˇ cek, Vinko Sabolˇ cec, Bettina Messmer, Negar Foroutan, Martin Jaggi, Leandro von Werra, and Thomas Wolf. 2024. FineWeb2: A sparkling update with 1000s of lan-guages. Cheng Peng, Xi Yang, Aokun Chen, Kaleb E. Smith, Nima PourNejatian, Anthony B. Costa, Cheryl Mar-tin, Mona G. Flores, Ying Zhang, Tanja Magoc, Glo-ria Lipori, Duane A. Mitchell, Naykky S. Ospina, Mustafa M. Ahmed, William R. Hogan, Elizabeth A. Shenkman, Yi Guo, Jiang Bian, and Yonghui Wu. 2023. A study of generative large language model for medical research and healthcare. npj Digital Medicine , 6(1). Qwen, :, An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jingren Zhou, and 25 oth-ers. 2025. Qwen2.5 technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2412.15115. Justus J. Randolph. 2005. Free-Marginal Multirater Kappa (multirater K [free]): An Alternative to Fleiss’ Fixed-Marginal Multirater Kappa. In Joensuu Learn-ing and Instruction Symposium .Ken Shoemake. 1985. Animating rotation with quater-nion curves. In Proceedings of the 12th Annual Con-ference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Tech-niques , SIGGRAPH ’85, page 245–254, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Karan Singhal, Tien Tu, Johannes Gottweis, and 1 others. 2025. Toward expert-level medical ques-tion answering with large language models. Nature Medicine .Shamane Siriwardhana, Mark McQuade, Thomas Gau-thier, Lucas Atkins, Fernando Fernandes Neto, Luke Meyers, Anneketh Vij, Tyler Odenthal, Charles God-dard, Mary MacCarthy, and Jacob Solawetz. 2024. Domain adaptation of llama3-70b-instruct through continual pre-training and model merging: A com-prehensive evaluation. Preprint , arXiv:2406.14971. Augustin Toma, Patrick R. Lawler, Jimmy Ba, Rahul G. Krishnan, Barry B. Rubin, and Bo Wang. 2023. Clinical camel: An open expert-level medical lan-guage model with dialogue-based knowledge encod-ing. Preprint , arXiv:2305.12031. Lewis Tunstall, Edward Beeching, Nathan Lambert, Nazneen Rajani, Kashif Rasul, Younes Belkada, Shengyi Huang, Leandro von Werra, Clémentine Fourrier, Nathan Habib, Nathan Sarrazin, Omar San-seviero, Alexander M. Rush, and Thomas Wolf. 2023. Zephyr: Direct Distillation of LM Alignment. 

Preprint , arXiv:2310.16944. Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol Vinyals, Percy Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. 2022. Emer-gent abilities of large language models. Preprint ,arXiv:2206.07682. Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pier-ric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, and 3 others. 2020. Trans-formers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations , pages 38–45, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Prateek Yadav, Tu Vu, Jonathan Lai, Alexandra Chronopoulou, Manaal Faruqui, Mohit Bansal, and Tsendsuren Munkhdalai. 2024. What mat-ters for model merging at scale? Preprint ,arXiv:2410.03617. Enneng Yang, Li Shen, Guibing Guo, Xingwei Wang, Xiaochun Cao, Jie Zhang, and Dacheng Tao. 2024a. Model merging in LLMs, MLLMs, and Beyond: Methods, Theories, Applications and Opportunities. 

Preprint , arXiv:2408.07666. Guoxing Yang, Xiaohong Liu, Jianyu Shi, Zan Wang, and Guangyu Wang. 2024b. Tcm-gpt: Efficient pre-training of large language models for domain adapta-tion in traditional chinese medicine. Computer Meth-ods and Programs in Biomedicine Update , 6:100158. Rowan Zellers, Ari Holtzman, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin Choi. 2019. Hellaswag: Can a machine really finish your sentence? Preprint ,arXiv:1905.07830. Yu Zhang, Xiusi Chen, Bowen Jin, Sheng Wang, Shui-wang Ji, Wei Wang, and Jiawei Han. 2024. A com-prehensive survey of scientific large language models and their applications in scientific discovery. In Pro-ceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Meth-ods in Natural Language Processing , pages 8783– 8817, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Compu-tational Linguistics. Yanli Zhao, Andrew Gu, Rohan Varma, Liang Luo, Chien-Chin Huang, Min Xu, Less Wright, Hamid Shojanazeri, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer, Alban Des-maison, Can Balioglu, Pritam Damania, Bernard Nguyen, Geeta Chauhan, Yuchen Hao, Ajit Math-ews, and Shen Li. 2023. Pytorch fsdp: Experi-ences on scaling fully sharded data parallel. Preprint ,arXiv:2304.11277. Guorui Zheng, Xidong Wang, Juhao Liang, Nuo Chen, Yuping Zheng, and Benyou Wang. 2025. Efficiently democratizing medical llms for 50 languages via a mixture of language family experts. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations (ICLR) . Poster. Furkan Öncel, Matthias Bethge, Betul Ermis, Mirco Ravanelli, Cem Subakan, and Ça˘ glar Yıldız. 2024. Adaptation odyssey in llms: Why does additional pretraining sometimes fail to improve? In Proceed-ings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 19834–19843. A Appendix 

A.1 Medical Document Pre-Classifier 

To classify documents into medical and non-medical categories, we apply the Mixtral-8x7B-Instruct-v0.1 model with a zero-shot prompting approach. The exact prompt used for classification is as follows: You are a medical expert tasked with identifying whether the provided content is both medical and high quality. Ana-lyze the content carefully based on the following criteria: - The content is related to health, medicine, or healthcare. - The information needs to be scien-tific, high-quality, accurate, and well-structured. Only allow the highest quality data. If it doesn’t seem scientific, then leave it out. Also, leave out news stories or sim-ilar styles of text that are not written by medical experts. Restrict your response to ’yes’ or ’no’. Do not include any other explanation. —Content: <DOCUMENT> This prompt is used to filter a subset of ap-proximately 260 k documents from the German 

FineWeb2 dataset. The model is constrained to gen-erate only a single token, a document is classified as medical if the output token is "yes"; otherwise, it is categorized as non-medical. 

A.1.1 Performance Evaluation of Medical Document Pre-Classifier 

To evaluate the performance of the LLM-based medical document classifier, we randomly sampled 

100 documents from the dataset, consisting of 50 

documents classified as medical and 50 classified as non-medical by the LLM. These were annotated by three human annotators, who independently as-sessed the class of each document. We achieved an inter-annotator agreement of 84 .7% , measured in 

Fleiss’ Kappa (Randolph, 2005). The evaluation results, presented in Table 5, demonstrate a strong overall performance of the LLM-based classifier, with an F1-score of 91 .1 ±

2.5. The overall performance suggests that the LLM effectively distinguishes between medical 

Metric Score 

Precision 92 .0 ± 2.9

Recall 90 .3 ± 2.6

F1-score 91 .1 ± 2.5

Accuracy 91 .0 ± 2.4 

> Table 5: Evaluation scores of the LLM’s performance against three human annotators on a random subset of
> 100 samples.

and non-medical documents, although minor dis-crepancies with human annotators were observed. To more closely evaluate the disagreement between the LLM and human annotators, we inspect the false positives in Table 6. We find that, while some false positives are clearly non-medical, others sug-gest a degree of relevance to the medical domain. Given these findings, we consider the LLM’s performance sufficiently robust to proceed with training a more specialized classifier using the re-sulting labeled FineMed-de-260k dataset. 

A.2 Training of Medical Classifier 

To efficiently classify documents as medical or non-medical, we fine-tune a XLM-RoBERTa-base 

model using the labeled FineMed-de-260k dataset. This fine-tuning process aims to optimize the model for high precision in distinguishing medical content. The model was trained for 5k steps, approximately two epochs, with a batch size of 96 , utilizing the 

AdamW (Loshchilov and Hutter, 2019) optimizer and a learning rate of 2 × 10 −5, with a weight de-cay of 0.01 . Given the emphasis on precision over recall, we used the Fβ score with β = 0 .7 as the early stopping criterion. 

> Figure 4: Performance metrics of the medical document classifier for various decision thresholds.

To ensure high precision during filtering, we Count False Positive Example 

3 Siehe auch: Mango Chicken Curry – Eine köstliche und gesunde Mahlzeit. Inhalt: 1. Erdmandeln sind reich an Ballaststoffen, 2. Erdmandeln sind reich an Vitaminen und Mineralstoffen, 3. Erdmandeln sind glutenfrei, 4. Erdmandeln sind ... 2 Es gibt sie wie Sand am Meer – die Persönlichkeitstest. Wir fragen uns, inwiefern ein solcher Test wirklich zu einem persönlichen Turnaround führen kann. Marlies Zindel führt eine eigene Beratungspraxis und nutzt den sogenannten Birkman-Test in ihren Gespr... 2 Dr. Preis ist unter den Top5:· Orthopäden in Köln (Stand 06/2017) Dr. med. Stefan Preis Arzt, Orthopäde Weiterbildungen: Chirotherapie (Manuelle Medizin), Sportmedizin Orthopädie/Sporttraumatologie Klinik am Ring Hohenstaufenring 28 50674 Köln ... 1 Video: Was versteht man unter dem Begriff Osmolarität? Osmotische Konzentration, früher bekannt als Osmolarität, ist das Maß für die Konzentration des gelösten Stoffes, definiert als die Anzahl der Osmole (Osm) des gelösten Stoffes pro Liter (L) der Lösung... 1 Viele Menschen haben den Verdacht, dass Tilapia "schlecht" oder "schmutzig" sei, was viele zu der Frage führt, ob der Fisch schlecht für Sie ist. Das liegt daran, dass Tilapia für seine Kontamination bekannt ist. In der Vergangenheit ernährten sich einige... 1 Forschungsförderung für UMG-Ernährungsprojekt Risiken früher erkennen, Komplikatio-nen verhindern Forschende der Unimedizin Greifswald wollen die Überlebenschancen von Patienten mit entzündeter Bauchspeicheldrüse steigern. Dazu möchten sie den Einfluss des... 1 Anders als beim Sehen, können wir nur schwer störende Geräusche ausblenden. Deswegen wirkt sich unerwünschter Lärm auch auf unseren Schlafqualität aus, erklärt Prof. Dr. med. Dipl.-Psych. Manfred Beutel. Nicht nur physiologische, sondern auch seelische... 

> Table 6: Excerpt of the false-positives from the manually annotated 100 samples, showing the text excerpts along with the number of annotators who deemed each sample non-medical.

Parameter PT 

Learning Rate 2 × 10 −5

Weight Decay 0.01 

Warmup Steps 500 Effective Batch Size 1024 

Sequence Length 8192  

> Table 7: Hyperparameters used for continual pre-training (PT).

employ a decision threshold of 0.9. This threshold is strategically chosen to minimize the inclusion of non-medical texts, prioritizing the precision of the resulting medical document selection. As depicted in Figure 4, this approach yields a precision of 0.95 

and a recall of 0.8 at the chosen threshold of 0.9,demonstrating an effective balance between these metrics. This application process allows for the reliable extraction of medical documents, forming the foundation of our specialized dataset. 

A.3 Continual Pre-Training Details 

The following outlines specific technical details in-volved in the continual pre-training process for our models. We describe the data handling strategies employed for efficient batching, the optimization setup and training schedule used to ensure stable and effective learning, and the hardware resources and distributed training techniques leveraged to scale our experiments. For batching efficiency, we adopt a bin-packing strategy, grouping sequences into constant-length batches to reduce padding and truncation. This ap-proach not only avoids the computational overhead of padding tokens but also results in better model performance and higher throughput (Ding et al., 2024). We separate different sequences within a sample using the tokenizer’s <EOS> token, allowing them to attend to each other within the same batch. This method contributed significantly to the overall efficiency of the pre-training process. We train the models using the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov and Hutter, 2019) with a linear learn-ing rate decay. In order to address training insta-bilities, we implement an extended warmup phase of 500 steps, representing about half of the medi-cal training corpus. To compensate for the longer warmup phase, we train all models for two epochs. Figure 5: Weak scaling behavior on Karolina and Leonardo. The actual computation per accelerator is kept constant throughout, with a micro batch size of 1. 

Research by Tunstall et al. (2023) suggests that training beyond 1.5 epochs yields minimal addi-tional benefits, which supports our training regime of 2 epochs with 0.5 epochs of warmup. Addition-ally, Muennighoff et al. (2023) indicate that four epochs are typically necessary before overfitting becomes a concern, further justifying our decision. The experiments were conducted across multi-ple compute clusters. For most models, we utilized 8 nodes on the Karolina cluster, each equipped with 8 NVIDIA A100 (40GB) GPUs. However, the Mistral-Small-24B model was trained on the Leonardo cluster 3, leveraging 128 nodes. Table 8 provides a summary of the hardware and compute resources used during the continual pre-training phase for each model. Although all models were trained for exactly two epochs, the number of steps per model varied. This discrepancy is due to dif-ferences in the model-specific tokenizers and their fertility on the training corpus. Detailed hyperpa-rameters are listed in Table 7. For multi-node settings, we employed the Hy-brid Sharding Data Parallel (HSDP) variant of FSDP. This approach involved distributing the data 

> 3https://leonardo-supercomputer.cineca.eu/

across multiple compute nodes and sharding the model parameters, gradients, and optimizer states within each node. By avoiding node-level sharding, we achieved near-linear scaling, as illustrated in Figure 5. In both cases, we reached a throughput of approximately 1850 tokens per second per GPU for 7B parameter sized models. This is consistent with findings of prior works, which report through-puts of 2350 (DiscoResearch et al., 2024) and 1950 (Labrak et al., 2024) tokens per second per GPU, respectively. Note that, due to its larger size, the 

Mistral-Small-24B model required full sharding across nodes, leading to a corresponding increase in communication overhead. The NVIDIA A100 accelerators available to us were equipped with only 40GB (Karolina) and 64GB (Leonardo) of VRAM. As a result, we had to reduce our micro batch size to 1, which lowered the arithmetic intensity compared to what would be possible on the more typical 80GB A100 GPUs. 

A.4 Merge Configuration 

We provide the SLERP merge configuration used for all models, following Lu et al. (2025). Rather than a uniform interpolation weight, we apply component-specific gradient schedules across the model depth for self-attention and MLP layers, while remaining parameters use t = 0 .5.

slices: - sources: - model: <base-model> layer_range: [0, <num_layers>] - model: <cpt-model> layer_range: [0, <num_layers>] merge_method: slerp base_model: <base-model> parameters: t: - filter: self_attn value: [0, 0.5, 0.3, 0.7, 1] - filter: mlp value: [1, 0.5, 0.7, 0.3, 0] - value: 0.5 dtype: float16 

A.5 Impact of Domain-Specific Filtering 

To rigorously assess the impact of utilizing a highly domain-specific dataset, we conduct an ablation study designed to isolate and quantify the benefit of our medical corpus compared to a baseline of unfiltered data. To this end, we create a subset Model Cluster Accelerator Num GPUs Time Steps Tokens 

Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3 Karolina A100 (40GB) 64 72h 2970 25.1B Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct Karolina A100 (40GB) 64 64h 2634 22.1B Mistral-Small-24B-Instruct Leonardo A100 (64GB) 128 48h 2294 19.2B 

Table 8: Computational resources invested in continual pre-training of different models.                               

> Model Anatomy Clinical Knowledge College Medicine MedQA Average
> Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct 54.07 ± 4.30 69.06 ± 2.85 63.01 ± 3.68 50.20 ± 2.24 59.08 ± 1.68 DeFineMed-Qwen2.5-7B 62.22 ± 4.19 76.60 ± 2.61 68.21 ± 3.55 52.60 ± 2.24 64.91 ± 1.62 FineWeb2-Qwen2.5-7B 56.30 ± 4.28 75.47 ± 2.65 61.85 ± 3.70 53.20 ± 2.23 61.70 ± 1.66 DeFineMed-Qwen2.5-7B-SLERP 65.19 ± 4.12 75.85 ± 2.63 65.90 ± 3.61 54.20 ± 2.23 65.28 ± 1.62 FineWeb2-Qwen2.5-7B-SLERP 55.56 ± 4.29 73.58 ± 2.71 68.21 ± 3.55 54.40 ± 2.23 62.94 ± 1.65

Table 9: Performance comparison of Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct models trained on domain-specific FineMed-de and randomly sampled FineWeb2-de data. Best score is underlined. 

of the FineWeb2 dataset, matching the size of our filtered medical corpus at 10 .0B tokens. Applying the medical document classifier from Section 3.2, reveals that only 0.89% of the sampled documents are related to the medical domain. We continually pre-trained the Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct model, using the exact same hyperparameters as discussed in Section 4.2, for two epochs, resulting in a total of 

22 .1B training tokens and evaluate under the same conditions as the other models. The performance results, presented in Table 9, demonstrate that the model trained on the random sample shows improvements over its base model. Interestingly, we find that the model trained on the random subset outperforms its domain-specific counterparts in three out of eight settings. This especially includes the MedQA benchmark. These exceptions need further investigation. On average however, it is clearly outperformed by the domain-specific model variants. The improvements ob-served in FineWeb2-Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct over the base model can be attributed to the inherent high quality of the FineWeb2 dataset and the general benefit of continual pre-training on German data. However, the substantially larger gains achieved with the model trained with the filtered medical cor-pus demonstrate the significant impact of a domain-specific corpus. 

A.6 Evaluation on Non-medical tasks 

To investigate potential trade-offs in instruction-following capabilities introduced by our domain-specific adaptation, we systematically evaluated the DeFineMed models on non-medical bench-marks. In particular, we compared the perfor-mance of the original pre-trained baseline mod-els with the versions obtained after continual pre-training on medical data and subsequent model merging. For this evaluation, we selected several widely used benchmarks outside the medical do-main: MMMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2021b,a), which measures broad multi-task generalization across knowledge areas; ARC-Easy and ARC-Challenge 

(Clark et al., 2018) for scientific and commonsense question answering; GSM8k (Cobbe et al., 2021) to assess mathematical reasoning; and HellaSwag 

(Zellers et al., 2019) for evaluating contextual un-derstanding and narrative completion. This setup allows us to quantify how well the adapted models retain general-purpose reasoning and instruction-following skills beyond their specialized medical context. As shown in Table 11, the medical models consistently outperform their base versions, sug-gesting that continual pre-training on our dataset not only enhances domain alignment on medical benchmarks but also improves general linguistic competence. 

A.7 Evaluation Prompts 

This section provides the prompt templates used in the pairwise win-rate evaluation (Section 5) and the failure mode analysis. All templates use Jinja2 syntax for variable substitution. 

A.7.1 Response Generation 

For both the pairwise win-rate and failure mode evaluations, each model is presented with the query from the German-translated MedAlpaca dataset us-ing the chat template of its corresponding base instruction-tuned model. No additional system prompt is applied. 

A.7.2 Pairwise Win-Rate Prompt 

The following prompt template is used with GPT-4.1-mini for the LLM-as-a-Judge pairwise compar-ison. The model is instructed to return a structured JSON response. 

[System] You are an AI assistant that evaluates pairs of responses to a given query. Your goal is to determine which response is better based on correctness, clarity, completeness, and relevance. [User] Compare the following two responses. Your answer needs to follow this json-schema: 

``` json {"type": "object", "properties": { "reasoning": { "type": "string", "description": "Detailed explanation of why this decision was made, analyzing the quality and characteristics of both responses." }, "winner": { "type": "string", "enum": ["A", "B", "0"], "description": "The winning response, i.e. 

'A', 'B' or '0' indicating a tie." }}, "required": ["reasoning", "winner"] }

``` 

Context: {{ context }} Query: {{ query }} Response A: {{ response_a }} Response B: {{ response_b }} Based on the query and context above, which response is better? 

A.7.3 Failure Mode Analysis Prompt 

The following prompt template is used with GPT-4.1 to classify failure modes in model responses. The model evaluates each failure mode indepen-dently and returns a structured JSON response. See table 10 for a complete list of all failure modes and their descriptions. 

[System] You are an evaluator of language model responses. Your task is to analyze whether the given response exhibits any of the following failure modes. 

``` json {"type": "object", "properties": { "language_mixing": { "type": "boolean", "description": "Whether the response unexpectedly switches between languages or dialects without instruction or user prompting." }, "typo": { "type": "boolean", "description": "Whether the response contains spelling mistakes, character errors, or malformed words that reduce readability." }, ... }, "required": [ "language_mixing", "typo", "contradiction", "hallucination", "omission", "overgeneralization", "irrelevance", "verbosity", "underexplained", "ambiguity", "instruction_ignoring", "repetition", "overconfidence", "bias_or_harm" ]}

``` 

Instructions: 1. Carefully read the translated question (the original user query) and the response (the model 's answer). 2. For each failure mode, decide whether it applies to the response. - Answer true if the failure mode is present. - Answer false if the failure mode is not present. 3. Return your answer as valid JSON following the json-schema above. [User] Context: {{ context }} Query (the question posed to the model): <<< {{ query }} >>> Response (the model 's answer to be evaluated): <<< {{ response }} >>> Failure Mode Description Language Mixing Whether the response unexpectedly switches between languages or dialects without instruction or user prompting. 

Typo Whether the response contains spelling mistakes, character errors, or malformed words that reduce readability. 

Contradiction Whether the response contains internal inconsistencies or conflicts with its own earlier statements. 

Hallucination Whether the response fabricates facts, citations, or details that are presented as truth but are not grounded in reliable sources. 

Omission Whether key details, steps, or context are missing, leading to an incomplete or misleading answer. 

Overgeneralization Whether the response makes broad, unsupported claims or ignores edge cases, resulting in oversimplification. 

Verbosity Whether the response is unnecessarily long-winded, repeating points without adding value. 

Underexplained Whether the response is too brief or lacks the necessary depth to be useful or correct. 

Ambiguity Whether the response is vague or unclear in wording, leading to multiple possible interpretations. 

Repetition Whether the response repeats phrases or sentences excessively, often due to generation loops. 

Overconfidence Whether the response states information in an authoritative tone despite being incorrect or uncertain. 

Table 10: Descriptions of Failure Modes                                                                   

> Model MMLU ARC-C ARC-E GSM8k HellaSwag Average
> BioMistral-7B-SLERP (baseline) 46.87 ± 0.41 40.96 ± 1.44 63.43 ± 0.99 2.35 ± 0.42 54.00 ± 0.50 41.52 ± 0.38 Mistral-7B-Instruct 50.33 ± 0.40 48.29 ± 1.46 68.81 ± 0.95 11.22 ± 0.87 59.82 ± 0.49 47.70 ± 0.41 Mistral-7B-Instruct-Medical 51.95 ± 0.40 49.23 ± 1.46 71.59 ± 0.93 11.60 ± 0.88 66.59 ± 0.47 50.19 ± 0.41 Mistral-7B-Instruct-Medical-SLERP 53.39 ± 0.40 49.83 ± 1.46 71.59 ± 0.93 13.27 ± 0.93 66.08 ± 0.47 50.83 ± 0.41 Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct 63.35 ± 0.39 51.28 ± 1.46 68.81 ± 0.95 58.23 ± 1.36 61.05 ± 0.49 60.54 ± 0.46 Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct-Medical 64.44 ± 0.38 51.28 ± 1.46 70.71 ± 0.93 63.38 ± 1.33 63.22 ± 0.48 62.61 ± 0.45 Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct-Medical-SLERP 65.57 ± 0.38 52.22 ± 1.46 70.12 ± 0.94 66.94 ± 1.30 62.22 ± 0.49 63.42 ± 0.45 Mistral-Small-24B-Instruct 71.95 ± 0.35 64.08 ± 1.40 80.98 ± 0.81 64.97 ± 1.31 71.96 ± 0.45 70.79 ± 0.43 Mistral-Small-24B-Instruct-Medical 71.26 ± 0.36 62.97 ± 1.41 80.89 ± 0.81 53.75 ± 1.37 73.15 ± 0.44 68.41 ± 0.44 Mistral-Small-24B-Instruct-Medical-SLERP 73.31 ± 0.35 65.27 ± 1.39 81.40 ± 0.80 56.86 ± 1.36 73.69 ± 0.44 70.11 ± 0.44

Table 11: Model performance on different German non-medical benchmarks in one-shot setting. The average accuracy is the unweighted mean of accuracies, whereas the average standard error is the square root of the unweighted mean of variances. Best score is underlined.