Title: 2026.acl-long.1411.pdf

URL Source: https://aclanthology.org/2026.acl-long.1411.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 11 Jun 2026 01:28:53 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
> Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 30572–30587 July 2-7, 2026 ©2026 Association for Computational Linguistics

# CPR-RAG: Clinical Prior-Regularized Retrieval for Anatomy-Aware 3D CT Report Generation 

Sungkyu Yang 

GIST 

yangsung9999@gmail.com 

Kang-Min Kim *

Kyung Hee University 

kangmin89@khu.ac.kr 

Mansu Kim *

GIST 

mansu.kim@gist.ac.kr 

Abstract 

Generating radiology reports from 3D volu-metric data remains challenging due to the dif-ficulty of grounding fine-grained pathologies within high-dimensional scans. While retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) offers a poten-tial solution, standard approaches struggle with visual-semantic ambiguity and often introduce irrelevant "normal" context that dilutes patho-logical signals. To address this limitation, we introduce CPR-RAG , a model-agnostic RAG framework that enhances organ-level ground-ing by integrating clinical priors into the re-trieval process. Specifically, we propose a 

clinical prior-regularized re-ranking module that leverages corpus-derived co-occurrence statistics to align retrieved candidates with la-tent disease distributions, ensuring clinical con-sistency beyond mere visual similarity. Fur-thermore, we employ clinical relevance con-text refinement to selectively filter out boiler-plate normal descriptions, thereby maximiz-ing the information density of the evidence provided to the generator. Extensive exper-iments on the RadGenome-ChestCT bench-mark demonstrate that CPR-RAG significantly improves clinical efficacy across state-of-the-art radiology report generation models. Hu-man evaluation further confirms that our ap-proach achieves superior factual correctness, completeness, and utility compared to the ex-isting models. Our code is available at https: //github.com/aimed-gist/cpr-rag 

1 Introduction 

Recent large language models (LLMs) have demon-strated remarkable capabilities in general text gen-eration (OpenAI, 2023; Grattafiori et al., 2024). However, their application in clinical settings re-mains challenging due to strict safety requirements, especially for generating radiology reports from high-dimensional 3D volumetric modalities such as CT and MRI (Thirunavukarasu et al., 2023). 

> *K.-M.Kim and M.Kim are co-corresponding authors.

Radiology report generation from 3D volumes is a section-structured, multi-organ reasoning task. Given that clinical reports are organized into dis-tinct anatomical structures (e.g., lung, mediastinum, pleura), the model requires localizing clinical findings and associating them with their specific anatomical structures. Consequently, the model faces a challenging grounding task that requires the model to link specific textual descriptions to potential visual evidence scattered across the high-dimensional 3D volume (Hamamci et al., 2024a; Tu et al., 2024). The challenge of visual-text grounding is further exacerbated by the morphological heterogeneity of findings (Litjens et al., 2017; Raghu et al., 2019). Unlike generic objects, lesions present diverse vari-ations in shape, texture, and size, often mimicking normal physiological structures. Accurately identi-fying these anomalies requires expert-level pattern recognition to distinguish fine-grained pathological cues from the dominant normal background (Esteva et al., 2019). Despite recent progress, medical vision language models (VLMs) still struggle with long-context grounding in 3D volumes. Compressing high-dimensional scans into compact representations can attenuate fine-grained regional evidence and exacer-bate visual-semantic misalignment (Bai et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2024). Moreover, radiology report gen-eration often exhibits normality bias under severe normal/abnormal imbalance, leading the generator to default to generic “safe” templates (e.g., “No acute abnormality”) rather than precise, evidence-grounded descriptions (Zhang et al., 2020; Miura et al., 2021). Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) is a nat-ural strategy to improve grounding by providing relevant external references (e.g., similar cases or reports) as additional context (Ranjit et al., 2023; Endo et al., 2021). However, conventional retrieval approaches using medical imaging face a funda-

30572 mental challenge due to visual-semantic misalign-ment, where visually similar patterns do not nec-essarily imply identical clinical etiology. For ex-ample, pneumonia and atelectasis can both present as pulmonary opacities (Irvin et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2017), yet require different clinical interpre-tations and management. A retrieved case that does not perfectly match the query across all anatomical structures due to visual-semantic misalignment can lead the generator to hallucinate. To address these challenges, we introduce CPR-RAG (Clinical Prior-Regularized RAG ), a plug-and-play framework that improves organ-level grounding for 3D report generation. Instead of relying solely on visual similarity, our approach integrates clinical regularity into the retrieval pro-cess. Specifically, CPR-RAG combines prior-based re-ranking to enforce clinical consistency and a context refinement mechanism to maximize the information density of the retrieved context to min-imize hallucination. This strategy ensures that the generator is guided by high-density pathological evidence rather than noisy or irrelevant priors. Our contributions are summarized as follows: • We propose CPR-RAG , a model-agnostic, organ-centric retrieval framework that can be integrated into the existing 3D VLM report generators in a plug-and-play fashion. • We introduce clinical prior-regularized re-ranking to address visual-semantic misalign-ment by leveraging corpus-level statistics, and 

clinical relevance context refinement to filter out boilerplate normal findings. This strategy effectively concentrates the information den-sity of pathological cues, thereby significantly improving context relevance for the generator. • Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method significantly improves clinical effi-cacy across the baselines (i.e., CT2Rep, M3D, RadFM). Furthermore, human evaluation con-firms that CPR-RAG achieves higher correct-ness, completeness, and utility with fewer hal-lucinations compared to baseline methods. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Visual-Conditioned Radiology Report Generation 

Radiology report generation is formally a visual-conditioned text generation task, translating vi-sual biomarkers into natural language descriptions. Common approaches adopt an encoder-decoder ar-chitecture conditioned on visual embeddings (Chen et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021). In this framework, a visual encoder projects the input image into a sequence of continuous embeddings, which serve as soft prompts guiding an autoregressive LLM to generate the report. While effective for 2D modalities (e.g., X-rays) (Lee et al., 2025), extending this paradigm to 3D volumetric data (e.g., CT, MRI) presents distinct representational constraints. Unlike 2D images, a 3D volume contains dense spatial information across hundreds of slices. Recent 3D-specialized VLMs, such as RadFM (Wu et al., 2025) and CT2Rep (Hamamci et al., 2024a), employ 3D-ViTs or resampling modules to project volumetric fea-tures into serialized token sequences aligned with the LLM. However, relying solely on fixed-length visual tokens creates an information bottleneck, often attenuating fine-grained details. This limitation inevitably causes factual hallucinations (Ji et al., 2023), highlighting the necessity for explicit, non-parametric grounding via RAG. 

2.2 Retrieval-Augmented Generation in Radiology 

RAG has emerged as a promising paradigm to ad-dress hallucinations by grounding generation on ex-ternal clinical evidence (Lewis et al., 2020). In med-ical imaging, conventional approaches typically leverage contrastive vision-language models (e.g., CLIP, BioViL) to retrieve existing radiology reports based on global image-text alignment (Endo et al., 2021; Yan et al., 2024). While effective for 2D X-rays where clinical pathologies remain discernible in planar projections, directly applying this global-level retrieval strategy to 3D volumetric imaging introduces two critical misalignments. First, although chest X-rays involve multi-organ assessment, all anatomical structures are repre-sented within a single 2D projection. In contrast, 3D CT preserves spatial separation across slices, requiring the model to localize findings across anatomically distinct regions. Representing such high-dimensional volumes with a single global em-bedding obscures fine-grained local features, lead-ing to the retrieval of morphologically similar yet pathologically different cases. Second, 3D CT re-ports typically describe multiple anatomical struc-tures simultaneously. As a result, retrieving a full report often introduces irrelevant descriptions of 30573 other organs, such as templated normal findings. This noise dilutes the information density within the prompt, causing the LLM to overlook the target abnormality due to the “lost-in-the-middle” phe-nomenon (Liu et al., 2024). Recent studies have attempted to address these challenges. Mao et al. (2025) proposed CT-Agent, an agentic framework with memory-based retrieval. However, its iterative tool-execution process incurs prohibitive inference latency and computational overhead compared to end-to-end pipelines. Simi-larly, RadIR (Zhang et al., 2025) introduced multi-grained retrieval at scale. However, it focuses on the retrieval task itself and does not validate its ef-ficacy for full report generation. These limitations underscore the necessity for an efficient retrieval-generation pipeline. 

3 CPR-RAG: Clinical Prior-Regularized Retrieval-Augmented Generation 

We propose CPR-RAG , a retrieval-augmented gen-eration framework specialized for 3D CT radiology report generation. Since the CT radiology report contains multiple findings across different anatomi-cal regions, such as heart, lungs, and mediastinum, we design CPR-RAG to operate in an organ-centric 

manner: for each organ, the model retrieves clini-cally relevant precedents and generates a localized finding description to complete the report. As shown in Figure 1, the framework comprises three stages: (1) anatomy-conditional represen-tation learning that disentangles global 3D fea-tures into organ-specific embeddings via learnable queries; (2) clinical prior-regularized retrieval ,which integrates visual affinity with corpus-derived co-occurrence statistics to prioritize clinically con-sistent candidates; and (3) clinical relevance con-text refinement , which minimizes semantic noise by filtering out boilerplate normal descriptions, thereby maximizing the information density of the context provided to the generator. 

3.1 Anatomy-Conditional Representation 

Because 3D CT scans cover many organs, a sin-gle global feature vector can blur small, localized abnormalities into normal anatomy. To enable fine-grained retrieval without requiring segmentation masks, we extract organ-specific embeddings using a query-based cross-attention mechanism. 

Organ-specific Embeddings. Let X ∈ RN ×d

denote the sequence of visual tokens computed by a frozen 3D visual encoder, where N is the number of tokens and d is the feature dimen-sion. We introduce a learnable query matrix 

Q = [ q1, . . . , q|Ω|]⊤ ∈ R|Ω|× d, where each query 

qi corresponds to the i-th anatomical region in 

Ω ={Heart, Lung, Mediastinum, Pleura, Tra-chea/Bronchi}. We compute organ-specific em-beddings via cross-attention, using Q as queries and X as keys/values: 

E = CrossAttn (Q, X, X), (1) where E = [ e1, . . . , e|Ω|]⊤ ∈ R|Ω|× d, and ei is the organ-specific embedding for organ i.

Training via Auxiliary Supervision. To encour-age ei to encode pathology-relevant semantics, we attach an organ-specific multi-label classifier Ci(·)

for each i ∈ Ω. Let L denote the universal set of abnormality labels, and Li is the subset of la-bels specific to organ i. For a training sample 

k, let y(k) 

> i

∈ { 0, 1}|L i| represent the multi-hot ground-truth label vector. Given the embedding 

e(k) 

> i

, the classifier predicts the disease probabil-ity p(k) 

> i

= Ci(e(k) 

> i

) ∈ [0 , 1] |L i|. We optimize the framework using a binary cross-entropy objective: 

Loss aux = ∑

> k

∑

> i∈Ω

BCE (p(k) 

> i

, y(k)

> i

). (2) This auxiliary task aligns the organ-specific embed-dings with spatially relevant clinical evidence and provides the predicted disease distributions utilized in Sections 3.2 and 3.3. 

Organ-Level Index Construction. We build an offline organ-level index I from the training cor-pus. For each training sample k and organ i ∈ Ω,we extract the embedding e(k) 

> i

and parse the corre-sponding radiology report t(k) 

> i

. We store the pair 

(e(k) 

> i

, t(k) 

> i

) in I, enabling retrieval of organ-specific descriptions at inference time. 

3.2 Clinical Prior-Regularized Retrieval 

Standard retrieval relying solely on visual embed-ding similarity often yields noisy results due to the visual ambiguity in medical imaging. To ad-dress this problem, we propose a two-stage retrieval strategy that retrieves organ-specific candidates fol-lowed by clinical prior-based re-ranking. 

Organ-Level Initial Retrieval. Given a query volume, we obtain organ embeddings {e(q) 

> i

}i∈Ω30574 Figure 1: Overview of the CPR-RAG framework. First, we train a cross-attention perceiver based on frozen vision encoder from an existing VLM to learn anatomy-conditional representations and build an offline organ-level index I. Second, given input image token e(q) 

> i

as the query, we retrieve visually similar candidates and refine them via clinical prior-regularized re-ranking using the corpus-derived comorbidity prior Mi for each organ. Finally, we filter out clinically normal contexts (e.g., "No lung nodule or mass is seen ") to maximize information density, and generate the final radiology report based on pretrained existing VLM using input image token and refined prompts. 

and retrieve candidates independently per organ. For each organ i, we compute cosine similarity between e(q) 

> i

and all indexed embeddings e(k) 

> i

in I,and collect the top-K candidates: 

Di = TopK 

(

cos( e(q) 

> i

, e(k) 

> i

)

)

. (3) Although visually similar, the set Di may contain clinically inconsistent cases that share image tex-ture but differ in underlying pathology. We there-fore re-rank Di using a hybrid objective (Eq. 6) that prioritizes candidates that are both visually similar and clinically consistent with the query. 

Corpus-Derived Comorbidity Prior. We distill co-occurrence statistics from training reports into a comorbidity prior matrix Mi ∈ [0 , 1] |L i|×|L i|,where Mi(j, k ) = P (fk | fj ) denotes the condi-tional probability of observing finding fk given 

fj :

Mi(j, k ) = Count (fj , f k) + α

Count (fj ) + α|L i| , (4) where α denotes a smoothing parameter, and fj

and fk denote disease labels. 

Clinical Prior-Regularized Re-ranking. For or-gan i, we estimate the query-specific disease prob-ability pi using the auxiliary classifier trained in Section 3.1. We then propagate this distribution through the prior: 

ci = p⊤ 

> i

Mi. (5) For each retrieved candidate d in the initial top-

K, characterized by its organ-specific embedding 

e(d) 

> i

and multi-hot label vector ld ∈ { 0, 1}|L i|, we compute the refined score: 

S(q, d ) = cos( e(q) 

> i

, e(d) 

> i

) + λ · (ci · ld), (6) where λ controls the contribution of the prior-aligned semantic term. After re-ranking, we select the top-1 candidate d∗ = arg max d∈D i S(q, d ) as the final evidence for each organ. 

3.3 Clinical Relevance Context Refinement 

Even after re-ranking, the retrieved texts often con-tain boilerplate normal findings (e.g., “no acute abnormality”, “The heart size is within normal lim-its.”) alongside pathological descriptions. Injecting such irrelevant normal descriptions can mislead the 30575 generator, causing it to overlook visual evidence of abnormalities. To address this problem, we propose clinical relevance context refinement , which selectively prunes retrieved contexts based on their ground-truth pathology labels. Given top-ranked retrieved candidate t(d∗) 

> i

for organ i, we refine the text by filtering out the description associated with normal findings, thereby retaining only clinically signifi-cant pathological evidence. Finally, the refined text 

Ri is obtained as: 

Ri =

{

t(d∗) 

> i

if y(d∗)

> i

̸ = Normal ,

∅ otherwise. (7) 

3.4 Anatomy-Aware Prompting & Generation 

We construct a structured anatomy-aware prompt by concatenating the refined texts in a fixed order. The retrieval prompt P is formed as follows: 

P = {[TAG ]i : Ri

}

> i∈Ω

, (8) where TAG i is an organ header denoting the anatomical region (e.g., [Lung]: ). If the context is filtered out, Ri is set to ∅.First, the visual tokens X are projected into vi-sual embeddings V via the compressor g(·). Here, 

g(·) denotes a model-specific token compressor that reduces the token length and projects features to the LLM embedding dimension. Finally, the generator creates the report W condi-tioned on the visual embeddings V, the instruction prompt Inst , and the retrieval prompt P:            

> P(W|V,Inst ,P) =
> T∏
> t=1
> P(wt|w<t ,V,Inst ,P)(9)

The detailed prompt utilized in our study is de-scribed in Appendix G. 

4 Experiments 

4.1 Data Setup Dataset & Partitioning. We evaluate our frame-work on RadGenome-ChestCT (Zhang et al., 2024), which contains 25,692 chest CT volumes from 21,303 patients paired with radiology reports and anatomy-aware textual annotations. As no public test set is provided, we use the official validation split ( N = 1 , 564 ) as a held-out test set. The of-ficial training split ( N = 24 , 128 ) is further parti-tioned into training ( 90% ) and internal validation (10% ) subsets at the patient level to prevent data leakage. We use the 18 binary abnormality labels defined in CT-RATE (Hamamci et al., 2024b) as our unified label space for organ-specific auxiliary supervision and downstream evaluation. The de-tailed label description is provided in Appendix A. 

Visual Input Processing. We process the 3D CT volumes using a standardized pipeline consisting of intensity clipping, min–max normalization, and spatial resampling to a unified resolution. Detailed preprocessing steps are provided in Appendix B. 

4.2 Experimental Setup Backbone Architectures. We utilize the pre-trained 3D visual encoders from three state-of-the-art models: CT2Rep (Hamamci et al., 2024a), RadFM (Wu et al., 2025), and M3D (Bai et al., 2024). To ensure a fair comparison, we employ the language decoder as Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct (Grattafiori et al., 2024) for all experimen-tal settings. To demonstrate the model-agnostic versatility of CPR-RAG , we employ both the visual encoders and the LLM in frozen, pre-trained states. We restrict training to only the lightweight projec-tion modules and LoRA adapters (Hu et al., 2022). This strategy prevents the model from simply mem-orizing training data via massive weight updates, suggesting that performance gains are primarily driven by the effective utilization of retrieved con-text. 

RAG Configuration. We utilize the training corpus as the retrieval knowledge base, strictly excluding the query study to prevent data leak-age. Retrieval operates at the organ level using FAISS (Johnson et al., 2019). To improve robust-ness, we incorporate both context dropout and vi-sion modality dropout during training (Yoran et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2023). Specific hyperparameters for retrieval ( K, λ) and dropout rates are described in Appendix B. 

Training Details. The model is optimized using AdamW (Loshchilov and Hutter, 2019) with a co-sine decay schedule. Training is performed with BF16 mixed precision using DeepSpeed (Rajbhan-dari et al., 2020) ZeRO-2 optimization. Training hyperparameters (learning rate, batch size, etc.) are listed in Appendix B. 

4.3 Evaluation Metrics Text Generation Quality. We employ standard natural language generation (NLG) metrics to eval-uate linguistic quality: BLEU-n (Papineni et al., 30576 Table 1: Overall performance on the RadGenome-ChestCT dataset. We compare state-of-the-art baselines with and without our proposed framework. + CPR denotes the integration of our CPR-RAG . The Oracle row serves as an empirical upper bound where the evidence is selected by ground-truth labels. For each backbone, the better performance between the baseline (e.g., RadFM) and its CPR-augmented version (e.g., RadFM+CPR) is highlighted in bold for each metric. The micro-averaged clinical efficacy and standard text generation quality metrics are reported.                                                                  

> Model Clinical efficacy [%] Text generation quality
> F1 Precision Recall BLEU-1 BLEU-2 BLEU-3 BLEU-4 METEOR ROUGE-L CT2Rep 20.16 28.71 15.53 0.593 0.356 0.250 0.198 0.409 0.306
> CT2Rep + CPR 26.04 24.76 27.46 0.506 0.283 0.182 0.130 0.411 0.266 M3D 22.37 27.95 18.65 0.571 0.328 0.219 0.165 0.400 0.287
> M3D + CPR 32.73 25.25 46.49 0.460 0.247 0.149 0.102 0.413 0.261 RadFM 15.74 26.79 11.14 0.606 0.361 0.249 0.193 0.397 0.303
> RadFM + CPR 32.10 24.71 45.80 0.433 0.240 0.147 0.100 0.429 0.244
> RadFM + CPR (Oracle) 45.15 44.91 45.39 0.555 0.333 0.227 0.171 0.440 0.300

2002), METEOR (Banerjee and Lavie, 2005), and ROUGE-L (Lin, 2004). 

Clinical Efficacy. Following the CT-RATE pro-tocol (Hamamci et al., 2024b), we use the Rad-BERT clinical labeler (Yan et al., 2022) to extract findings from the generated reports and evaluate micro-averaged Precision, Recall, and F1 scores. 

Retrieval Quality. To assess the quality of the retrieved evidence, we compute finding-level cov-erage for the top-1 re-ranked document. Retrieval recall is defined as the proportion of ground-truth abnormalities captured by the labels of the selected document, whereas retrieval precision quantifies the proportion of relevant findings among those present in the selected document. Detailed defini-tions are provided in Appendix C. 

Human Evaluation. To assess clinical validity, we conduct a blinded side-by-side evaluation with a board-certified radiologist on randomly selected cases ( N = 100 ) from test set. The radiologist evaluate generated reports in terms of complete-ness , correctness , and utility . Detailed evaluation protocols and the specific scoring rubrics are pro-vided in Appendix D. 

5 Results and Analysis 

5.1 Overall Performance 

We evaluate the efficacy of our framework by ap-plying it to three state-of-the-art 3D CT report gen-eration backbones: CT2Rep, M3D, and RadFM. Table 1 presents a quantitative comparison between the standard baselines and our proposed settings (Baseline + CPR ) on the RadGenome-ChestCT test set. To assess the empirical upper bound of our strategy, we report the Oracle performance, where evidence selection is guided by ground-truth labels. 

Clinical Utility. Integrating the CPR-RAG frame-work yields consistent improvements in clinical ef-ficacy across all backbones. Most notably, RadFM + CPR achieves a F1-score of 32.10, outperform-ing the RadFM baseline (15.74) by a substantial improvement of +16.36 points. We observe that the RadFM baseline suffers from extremely low recall (11.14), indicating a failure to identify sparse pathological findings. However, the RadFM + CPR 

improves recall to 45.80. This suggests that the retrieved context provides necessary semantic guid-ance, enabling the recovery of sparse findings that the visual encoder failed to detect. 

Linguistic Fluency. Regarding NLG metrics, we observe a trade-off pattern between BLEU and ME-TEOR. As shown in Table 1, incorporating CPR-RAG improves METEOR, with the exception of BLEU and ROUGE-L. These results suggest that the proposed framework enables the capture of cor-rect pathological semantics, even if the descriptions do not match the reference text word-for-word. 

Comparison with Oracle. To evaluate upper bound of CPR-RAG , we compare RadFM + CPR 

against the Oracle setting. Our framework recov-ers approximately 71% of the Oracle F1 (32.10 vs. 45.15). These results suggest that the proposed 

corpus-derived comorbidity prior provides a ro-bust proxy for ground-truth knowledge and approx-imates ideal evidence selection without inference-time labels. 30577 Figure 2: Effect of re-ranking varying pool size. We ablate RadFM+CPR to evaluate retrieval quality; which relies on visual similarity alone, CPR-RAG without prior ( visual similarity + re-ranking (w/o prior )), and 

CPR-RAG with prior ( visual similarity + re-ranking (w/ prior) )

5.2 Impact of Comorbidity Prior on Re-ranking 

To investigate the efficacy of our corpus-derived comorbidity prior , we analyze the recall@1 per-formance across varying candidate pool sizes 

K ∈ {1, . . . , 200 }. We compare three strate-gies derived from the scoring function S(q, d ) = cos( e(q) 

> i

, e(d) 

> i

) + λ(ci · ld): 1) visual similarity 

(blue), which relies solely on visual similarity (λ = 0 ); 2) visual similarity + re-ranking (w/o prior) (orange), utilizing raw classifier outputs (ci = pi) without the matrix M; and 3) visual similarity + re-ranking (w/ prior) (green), which incorporates the comorbidity prior ( ci = p⊤ 

> i

Mi). As shown in Figure 2, the visual similarity base-line remains invariant at 0.30, as the top-1 ranking is determined solely by the initial query regardless of pool expansion. The re-ranking w/o prior strat-egy improves performance but saturates at 0.60, suggesting that re-ranking based on raw predictions is limited by classifier noise and sparsity. In con-trast, the re-ranking w/ prior method demonstrates robust scalability, reaching 0.91 at K=200 . This indicates that the comorbidity prior effectively com-pensates for missing direct evidence by inferring latent pathological associations, thereby recover-ing relevant candidates even from deep within the retrieval pool. 

5.3 Effectiveness of Context Refinement 

To investigate the effectiveness of filtering, we compare the CPR-RAG with and without the clini-cal relevance context refinement module based on RadFM backbone. As shown in Table 2, incorpo-

Figure 3: Qualitative comparison of RadFM vs. 

RadFM + CPR . Green indicates the ground-truth find-ings, red marks erroneous statements, and blue high-lights correct predictions. Dashed boxes denote the retrieved reference evidence. Two cases are shown: (a) pericardial effusion with cardiomegaly and (b) atelecta-sis with pleural effusion. 

rating clinical relevance context refinement always improves performance, not only clinical efficacy but also linguistic fluency. In particular, CPR-RAG (w/ refinement) improves the F1-score from 27.26 to 32.10 (+4.84) and recall from 27.69 to 45.80 (+18.11), while precision slightly decreases from 26.84 to 24.71. Surprisingly, CPR-RAG (w/ refine-ment) even improves the performance in the Oracle 

setting, where ground-truth labels are utilized for retrieval. These results indicate that minimizing ir-relevant normal findings improves the information density of the prompt and generation performance depends on the pathological evidence. 

5.4 Qualitative & Human Evaluation Case Studies. Figure 3 presents two scenarios cases to qualitatively compare between the RadFM and RadFM + CPR . In case (a), the RadFM fails 

Table 2: Ablation study on the clinical relevance con-text refinement module. Experiments are conducted using the RadFM backbone. We report micro-averaged clinical efficacy and standard text generation quality metrics. The best values are highlighted in bold .                                

> Model Clinical efficacy [%] Text generation quality
> F1 Precision Recall BLEU-4 METEOR BERTScore
> RadFM+RAG (w/o refinement) 27.26 26.84 27.69 0.146 0.419 0.893
> RadFM+RAG (w/ refinement) 32.10 24.71 45.80 0.100 0.429 0.894
> RadFM+RAG (Oracle) (w/o refinement) 38.86 35.59 42.79 0.140 0.428 0.894 RadFM+RAG (Oracle) (w/ refinement) 45.15 44.91 45.38 0.171 0.440 0.897

30578 Table 3: Human evaluation results. The evaluation is conducted by a board-certified radiologist on 100 randomly sampled cases. Reports are assessed on a 1–5 Likert scale. Statistical significance is assessed using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test. The best scores are highlighted in bold .              

> Metric RadFM RadFM + CPR p-value Completeness 2.48 2.93 <0.01
> Correctness 2.30 2.45 0.12
> Utility 2.76 3.09 <0.01

to capture both pericardial effusion and the accom-panying cardiomegaly, however, RadFM + CPR 

correctly identify both findings by leveraging a re-trieved reference containing this specific pattern (bottom dashed box). A similar improvement is ob-served in Case (b), where the ground truth involves atelectasis complicated by pleural effusion. The RadFM partially detects the atelectasis but fails to identify the concurrent effusion, whereas RadFM + CPR successfully captures both findings. Col-lectively, these examples indicate that CPR-RAG 

utilizes retrieved clinical priors to compensate for visual ambiguity, ensuring that subtle, associated findings are not overlooked. Additional cases are presented in Appendix F. 

Human Evaluation. In addition to case studies, we conduct a blinded human evaluation by a board-certified radiologist. In particular, we randomly sample 100 cases from the test set and the radiolo-gist evaluates the reports using a 1–5 Likert scale: (1) completeness , measuring the extent to which necessary findings are captured without omission, and (2) correctness , assessing the absence of hallu-cinations or factual errors. (3) utility , evaluating the practical readiness of the generated report for clin-ical workflows (i.e., whether it reduces reporting time or requires rewriting). The detailed evaluation protocols are described in Appendix D. We report the results in Table 3, showing that the RadFM + CPR improves performance across all metrics compared to the RadFM. In particular, 

RadFM + CPR yields statistically significant im-provements in completeness (2.93, p < 0.01 ) and utility (3.09, p < 0.01 ), whereas the improvement in correctness (2.45) does not reach statistical sig-nificance ( p = 0 .12 ), as assessed by the Wilcoxon signed-rank test. These results highlight that CPR-RAG reduces hallucination and missing findings. Moreover, the utility score indicates that while the generated reports still require physician review and 

Table 4: Analysis of report-level detection and missed diagnoses. We compare the rate of generated reports containing no findings (“predicted as healthy”) against the ground truth. Values are reported as count (%).                      

> Model Predicted as healthy Missed diagnosis (False negative) False alarm (False positive) RadFM 748 (47.8%) 661(42.3%) 106(6.8%)
> RadFM + CPR 98 (6.3%) 26 (1.7%) 120(7.7%) CT2Rep 532 (34.0%) 466 (29.7%) 127(8.12%)
> CT2Rep + CPR 217 (13.9%) 84 (5.4%) 60(3.8%) M3D 429 (27.4%) 379 (24.2%) 143(9.1%)
> M3D + CPR 364 (23.3%) 211 (13.5%) 40(2.6%)
> ∗Test set ( N=1,564) contains 192 (12.3%) healthy cases.

editing, they serve as a helpful draft that effectively reduces the time and effort required for final docu-mentation. 

5.5 Analysis of Normality Bias 

Table 4 evaluates the report-level detection perfor-mance by comparing the rate of all-negative pre-dictions against the ground truth. We observe that all baseline methods demonstrate a high misdiag-nosis rate and can be improved by our framework. For example, RadFM classifies 47.8% of cases as all-negative, substantially exceeding the ground-truth prevalence of 12.3%. Surprisingly, the false negative rate (misdiagnosis) is 42.3% with RadFM, however, it drops to 1.7% with RadFM + CPR. Sim-ilar patterns are observed with CT2Rep and M3D, demonstrating that the retrieved context effectively prompts the generator to recover findings that are otherwise omitted by the visual encoder. These findings are important because missing a disease (false negative) is much worse than a false alarm (false positive) in medical screening. In med-ical screening, the priority is to find every poten-tial patient. Although our approach increases false alarms, this is an acceptable trade-off to ensure that no disease is overlooked. In a real-world workflow, where doctors review the final report, it is safer to be sensitive rather than missing diagnosis. 

5.6 Evaluation on Rare Pathologies 

To investigate the impact of our comorbidity prior on rare diseases, we evaluate performance on pathologies with less than or equal to 10% preva-lence in the training set (Pericardial effusion: 7.24%, Mosaic attenuation pattern: 7.72%, In-terlobular septal thickening: 7.94%, Bronchiecta-sis: 10.04%) and rare co-occurring disease pairs with less than 1% joint prevalence. As shown in 30579 Table 5: Clinical efficacy on rare pathologies. We evaluate rare cases ( ≤10% training prevalence) and rare co-occurring disease pairs ( <1% joint prevalence). Val-ues are reported as Micro (%). For each backbone, the better performance between the baseline and its CPR-augmented version is highlighted in bold for each met-ric.                                            

> Model Rare cases Rare co-occurring pairs
> F1 Precision Recall F1 Precision Recall CT2Rep 6.50 10.13 4.78 0.00 0.00 0.00
> CT2Rep + CPR 11.34 14.37 9.36 1.50 1.54 1.47
> M3D 6.94 9.18 5.58 0.00 0.00 0.00
> M3D + CPR 25.14 27.55 23.11 2.68 2.47 2.94
> RadFM 3.92 6.60 2.79 0.00 0.00 0.00
> RadFM + CPR 21.08 24.10 18.73 2.63 2.38 2.94

Table 5, models with CPR-RAG consistently im-prove performance over all baselines on these rare pathologies (e.g., M3D: 6.94% → 25.14% Micro F1, RadFM: 3.92% → 21.08% Micro F1). Fur-thermore, for rare co-occurring disease pairs, all baselines score exactly zero in Micro F1, whereas models with CPR-RAG achieve non-zero scores across all backbones (e.g., CT2Rep: 0.00% →

1.50%, M3D: 0.00% → 2.68%, RadFM: 0.00% 

→ 2.63%). These results suggest that the retrieval mechanism can help surface rare findings and rare comorbid patterns that generation-only models fail to produce. 

6 Conclusion 

We propose CPR-RAG , a model-agnostic, organ-centric retrieval framework, that improves 3D ra-diology report generation by addressing visual-semantic misalignment and hallucination. In par-ticular, we integrate clinical prior-regularized re-ranking into retrieval process to address visual-semantic misalignment in high-dimensional vol-umetric data. Additionally, we filter out irrelevant normal findings from retrieved candidate context to maximize information density, which help to clinical efficacy of generated reports. Our experiments on the RadGenome-ChestCT dataset demonstrate that CPR-RAG improves clin-ical efficacy across multiple baselines, including RadFM and CT2Rep. The results indicate that leveraging statistical priors allows the model to bet-ter identify sparse pathological evidence compared to reliance on visual similarity alone. Furthermore, the ablation studies suggest that maximizing infor-mation density by removing boilerplate text effec-tively guides the generator toward accurate finding descriptions. 

Limitations 

Despite the promising results, our framework faces several limitations to improve. 

Limited External Validity. Although RadGenome-ChestCT includes scans acquired under diverse scanner and protocol settings, it is still derived from a single institution, resulting in relatively consistent reporting style and phrasing. This raises concerns about distribution shift when deploying CPR-RAG to multi-center datasets with different report templates, terminology, and documentation habits. Future work should explore leveraging LLMs to construct such annotations for external cohorts, thereby enabling robust cross-site validation and the investigation of domain adaptation strategies to improve cross-site generalization. 

Gap to Clinical Applicability. While CPR-RAG demonstrates substantial improvement (+16.36 F1) over baselines, the absolute Clinical F1 score (∼32%) remains insufficient for fully autonomous clinical adoption. In safety-critical medical en-vironments, strict adherence to factual accuracy is paramount, and hallucinations pose significant risks. Consequently, improving clinical efficacy is a prerequisite for real-world deployment. 

Rigid Report Structuring. Furthermore, our cur-rent reporting flow does not reflect the dynamic prioritization of clinical practice. Radiologists typ-ically prioritize acute or critical abnormalities to ensure immediate attention, whereas our system constructs prompts in a fixed, predefined sequence (e.g., Lung → Heart), disregarding the relative ur-gency of pathologies. This static ordering limits the system’s ability to highlight the most clinically significant findings first. Extending the framework to handle such prioritization via dynamic planning remains an open challenge. 

Dependency on Static Priors. From a model-ing perspective, the reliance on comorbidity priors derived solely from training statistics inherently limits generalization to rare, long-tail pathologies. Moreover, the current co-occurrence matrix models only pairwise relationships ( A → B), simplifying the complex, high-order dependencies often ob-served in medicine. Incorporating external medical knowledge graphs (e.g., UMLS, SNOMED-CT) to capture sophisticated, neuro-symbolic causal re-lationships remains a crucial direction for future 30580 research. 

Sensitivity to Error Propagation. Finally, the efficacy of the retrieval module is contingent on the accuracy of upstream organ-specific classifiers. Since the system utilizes predicted probabilities to guide context selection, miscalibrations can propa-gate through the pipeline, potentially filtering out relevant evidence or injecting noise. Enhancing the robustness of these guidance classifiers to min-imize such error propagation is critical for stable deployment. 

Acknowledgments 

We thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments. This research was supported by the Na-tional Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT (MSIT) (No. RS-2025-00521250, 2022R1C1C1010317). This work was partly supported by the Institute of Infor-mation & Communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) funded by MSIT (No. 2019-0-01842, Artificial Intelligence Graduate School Program (GIST)); and by the InnoCORE program of MSIT (GIST InnoCORE, KH0860). This work was also partly supported by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy (MOTIE), Korea, under the Infrastructure Program for Industrial Innovation su-pervised by the Korea Institute for Advancement of Technology (KIAT) (No. RS-2024-00434342). 

References 

Fan Bai, Yuxin Du, Tiejun Huang, Max Q-H Meng, and Bo Zhao. 2024. M3d: Advancing 3d medical image analysis with multi-modal large language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.00578 .Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. 2005. Meteor: An automatic metric for mt evaluation with improved correlation with human judgments. In Proceedings of the ACL workshop on intrinsic and extrinsic evalu-ation measures for machine translation and/or sum-marization , pages 65–72. Zhihong Chen, Yan Song, Tsung-Hui Chang, and Xi-aojun Wan. 2020. Generating radiology reports via memory-driven transformer. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 1439–1449. Mark Endo, Rayan Krishnan, Viswesh Krishna, An-drew Y. Ng, and Pranav Rajpurkar. 2021. Retrieval-based chest x-ray report generation using a pre-trained contrastive language-image model. In Pro-ceedings of Machine Learning Research , volume 158 of Proceedings of the 6th Machine Learning for Health Conference (MLHC 2021) , pages 209–219. PMLR. Andre Esteva, Alexandre Robicquet, Bharath Ramsun-dar, Volodymyr Kuleshov, Mark DePristo, Katherine Chou, Claire Cui, Greg Corrado, Sebastian Thrun, and Jeff Dean. 2019. A guide to deep learning in healthcare. Nature Medicine , 25(1):24–29. Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schel-ten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, and 1 others. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783 .Ibrahim Ethem Hamamci, Sezgin Er, and Bjoern Menze. 2024a. Ct2rep: Automated radiology report genera-tion for 3d medical imaging. In Medical Image Com-puting and Computer Assisted Intervention – MIC-CAI 2024 , pages 476–486. Springer. Ibrahim Ethem Hamamci, Sezgin Er, Enis Simsar, Alperen F Tabak, Baris Atac, Ayse Betul Kose, Ecem Masazade, Berke Sevgi, Zeynep Sevgi, Gozde Unal, and 1 others. 2024b. Ct-rate: A high-fidelity 3d chest ct-report dataset for multi-modal foundation model pretraining. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.17834 .Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. 2022. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Jeremy Irvin, Pranav Rajpurkar, Michael Ko, Yifan Yu, Silviana Ciurea-Ilcus, Chris Chute, Henrik Mark-lund, Behzad Haghgoo, Robyn Ball, Katie Shpan-skaya, and 1 others. 2019. Chexpert: A large chest radiograph dataset with uncertainty labels and expert 30581 comparison. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 33, pages 590–597. Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Ye Jin Bang, Andrea Madotto, and Pascale Fung. 2023. Survey of halluci-nation in natural language generation. ACM Comput-ing Surveys , 55(12):1–38. Jeff Johnson, Matthijs Douze, and Hervé Jégou. 2019. Billion-scale similarity search with gpus. IEEE Transactions on Big Data , 7(3):535–547. Seowoo Lee, Jiwon Youn, Hyungjin Kim, Mansu Kim, and Soon Ho Yoon. 2025. Cxr-llava: a multimodal large language model for interpreting chest x-ray images. European Radiology , pages 1–13. Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Hein-rich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-täschel, and 1 others. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. In Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , volume 33, pages 9459–9474. Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text summarization branches out , pages 74–81. Jingyang Lin, Yingda Xia, Jianpeng Zhang, Ke Yan, Le Lu, Jiebo Luo, and Ling Zhang. 2024. Ct-glip: 3d grounded language-image pretraining with ct scans and radiology reports for full-body scenarios. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.15272 .Geert Litjens, Thijs Kooi, Babak Ehteshami Bejnordi, Arnaud Arindra Adiyoso Setio, Francesco Ciompi, Mohsen Ghafoorian, Jeroen A. W. M. van der Laak, Bram van Ginneken, and Clara I. Sánchez. 2017. A survey on deep learning in medical image analysis. 

Medical Image Analysis , 42:60–88. Fenglin Liu, Changchang Yin, Xian Wu, Shen Ge, Ping Zhang, and Xu Sun. 2021. Contrastive attention for automatic chest x-ray report generation. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021 , pages 269–280. Association for Computational Linguistics. Nelson F Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paran-jape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy Liang. 2024. Lost in the middle: How language mod-els use long contexts. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 12:157–173. Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. 2019. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Confer-ence on Learning Representations .Yuren Mao, Wenyi Xu, Yuyang Qin, and Yunjun Gao. 2025. Ct-agent: A multimodal-llm agent for 3d ct radiology question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.16229 .Yasuhide Miura, Yuhao Zhang, Emily Tsai, Curtis Lan-glotz, and Dan Jurafsky. 2021. Improving factual completeness and consistency of image-to-text radi-ology report generation. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pages 5288–5304. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. OpenAI. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 .Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a method for automatic evalu-ation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics , pages 311–318. Association for Computational Linguistics. Maithra Raghu, Chiyuan Zhang, Jon Kleinberg, and Samy Bengio. 2019. Transfusion: Understanding transfer learning for medical imaging. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 32. Samyam Rajbhandari, Jeff Rasley, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He. 2020. Zero: Memory optimizations toward training trillion parameter models. In SC20: International Conference for High Performance Com-puting, Networking, Storage and Analysis , pages 1– 16. IEEE. Mercy Ranjit, Gopinath Ganapathy, Ranjit Manuel, and Tanuja Ganu. 2023. Retrieval augmented chest x-ray report generation using openai gpt models. In 

Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , volume 219 of Proceedings of the 8th Machine Learning for Health Conference (MLHC 2023) , pages 650–666. PMLR. Arun James Thirunavukarasu, Daniel Shu Wei Ting, Kallisvaran Elangovan, Laura Gutierrez, Ting Fang Tan, and David Shu Wei Ting. 2023. Large language models in medicine. Nature medicine , 29(8):1930– 1940. Tao Tu, Shekoofeh Azizi, Danny Driess, Mike Schaeker-mann, Mohamed Amin, Pi-Chuan Chang, and 1 oth-ers. 2024. Towards generalist biomedical ai. NEJM AI , 1(3):AIoa2300138. Wenhui Wang, Hangbo Bao, Li Dong, Johan Bjorck, Zhiliang Peng, Qiang Liu, Kriti Aggarwal, Owais Mohammed, Saksham Singhal, Subhojit Som, and 1 others. 2023. Image as a foreign language: Beit pretraining for all vision and vision-language tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 19175–19186. Xiaosong Wang, Yifan Peng, Le Lu, Zhiyong Lu, Mo-hammadhadi Bagheri, and Ronald M Summers. 2017. Chestx-ray8: Hospital-scale chest x-ray database and benchmarks on weakly-supervised classification and localization of common thorax diseases. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 2097–2106. 30582 Chaoyi Wu, Xiaoman Zhang, Ya Zhang, Hui Hui, Yan-feng Wang, and Weidi Xie. 2025. Towards generalist foundation model for radiology by leveraging web-scale 2d&3d medical data. Nature Communications ,16(1):7866. An Yan, Yu Wang He, and Chun-Nan McAuley, Ju-lian andXHsu. 2022. Radbert: Adapting transformer-based language models to radiology. Radiology: Ar-tificial Intelligence , 4(4):e210258. Sixing Yan, William K. Cheung, Ivor W. Tsang, Keith Chiu, Terence M. Tong, Ka Chun Cheung, and Si-mon See. 2024. Ahive: Anatomy-aware hierarchical vision encoding for interactive radiology report re-trieval. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ,pages 14324–14333. Ori Yoran, Tomer Wolfson, Ori Ram, and Jonathan Berant. 2024. Making retrieval-augmented language models robust to irrelevant context. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Tengfei Zhang, Ziheng Zhao, Chaoyi Wu, Xiao Zhou, Ya Zhang, Yanfeng Wang, and Weidi Xie. 2025. Radir: A scalable framework for multi-grained med-ical image retrieval via radiology report mining. In 

Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted In-tervention – MICCAI 2025 , pages 508–518. Springer. Xiaoman Zhang, Chaoyi Wu, Ziheng Zhao, Jiayu Lei, Ya Zhang, Yanfeng Wang, and Weidi Xie. 2024. Radgenome-chest ct: A grounded vision-language dataset for chest ct analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16754 .Yuhao Zhang, Derek Merck, Emily Tsai, Christopher D. Manning, and Curtis Langlotz. 2020. Optimizing the factual correctness of a summary: A study of summa-rizing radiology reports. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 5108–5120. 

Appendix A Disease Labels 

We utilize the 18 binary abnormality labels in-herited from the CT-RATE corpus (Hamamci et al., 2024b). Based on the RadGenome-ChestCT (Zhang et al., 2024) schema, these labels are mapped to five anatomical regions, as shown in Table 6. 

Table 6: List of abnormality labels. Mapped to anatom-ical regions based on the dataset annotations. Note that 

Medical material is categorized as ‘Others’ as it com-prises heterogeneous devices appearing across multiple anatomical regions (e.g., pacemakers, tubes, clips).              

> Anatomical Region Abnormality Labels Lungs Lung Nodule, Lung Opac-ity, Atelectasis, Consolidation, Emphysema, Pulmonary Fi-brotic Sequela, Mosaic Attenua-tion Pattern, Interlobular Septal Thickening
> Heart Cardiomegaly, Pericardial Effu-sion, Coronary Artery Wall Cal-cification, Arterial Wall Calcifi-cation
> Trachea and Bronchi Bronchiectasis, Peribronchial Thickening
> Mediastinum Lymphadenopathy, Hiatal Her-nia
> Pleura Pleural Effusion
> Others Medical Material

B Implementation Details 

Data Preprocessing. We preprocess collected 3D CT scans the following steps: 1) Intensity Clip-ping: Hounsfield Unit (HU) values are truncated to [−1000 , 1000] . 2) Normalization: Voxel inten-sities are linearly scaled to [0 , 1] . 3) Resampling: 

Volumes are resized to 256 × 256 × 64 via trilinear interpolation. 

Hyperparameters We provide the detailed hy-perparameters used for training and our RAG mod-ule in Table 7. We use the top-1 retrieved report for each organ as the final evidence. 

C Retrieval Metrics 

We formally define the retrieval quality metrics used in Section 5.2. These metrics evaluate the evidence before it is passed to the generator, and 30583 Table 7: Hyperparameter Settings.                   

> Hyperparameter Value
> Training Optimization
> Optimizer AdamW Learning Rate 5e−5
> Weight Decay 0.01
> Batch Size (per device) 4Gradient Accumulation 4Warmup Steps 100 Epochs 5Precision BF16 (DeepSpeed ZeRO-2)
> PEFT (LoRA)
> Rank ( r)8Scaling ( α)32 LoRA Dropout 0.05 Target Modules Self-attention layers
> RAG Module
> Retrieval Candidates ( K)100 Reranking Weight ( λ)0.3 Context Dropout ( p)0.25 Visual Dropout ( p)0.20 Similarity Metric Inner Product ( ℓ2-norm)

are distinct from the clinical efficacy metrics (Pre-cision, Recall, F1) which evaluate the generated report .Let Lq be the set of ground-truth labels for a query. Given a candidate pool of size K, let d∗

denote the top-1 document after re-ranking, and 

L(d∗) its label set. We define: Retrieval Recall = |Lq ∩ L(d∗)||Lq| (10) Retrieval Precision = |Lq ∩ L(d∗)||L(d∗)| (11) These metrics quantify the trade-off between cov-erage and noise in the selected evidence. Note that the candidate pool size K affects which document is selected as d∗ via re-ranking, but the metrics themselves always evaluate the single top-ranked document. 

D Human Evaluation Details 

Evaluation Protocol The human evaluation is conducted in a blinded, side-by-side manner. We randomly sampled N = 100 cases from the held-out test set. For each case, we provide the orig-inal ground-truth report to the board-certified ra-diologist to serve as the reference standard. Sub-sequently, two generated reports labeled anony-mously as “Report A” and “Report B,” are provided to the radiologist. To prevent potential bias, the as-signment of models (e.g., RadFM and RadFM + 

Table 8: Human evaluation rubric. The scoring crite-ria and definitions used by the board-certified radiologist are provided.           

> Criteria Score & Definition Completeness 5 (Excellent): Covers all critical and inci-dental findings present in the image.
> 3 (Fair): Misses minor incidental findings but captures key pathologies.
> 1 (Poor): Misses critical abnormalities or major pathologies.
> Correctness 5 (Accurate): No factual errors or halluci-nations.
> 3 (Acceptable): Contains minor errors that do not alter the clinical diagnosis.
> 1 (Wrong): Contains critical hallucina-tions or false positives.
> Utility 5 (Ready): Can be used as a final report without modification.
> 3 (Helpful): Requires minor editing but reduces reporting time.
> 1 (Useless): Requires complete rewriting; potentially misleading.

CPR ) to labels A and B is randomized for every case, ensuring that the evaluator remains unaware of the source of each report. 

Scoring Rubric The radiologist evaluated each report using a 5-point Likert scale. The specific criteria for Completeness , Correctness , and Utility 

are defined in Table 8. 

E Analysis of organ-specific embeddings 

To validate the anatomy-conditional learning, we visualize the organ-specific embeddings using t-SNE. As illustrated in Figure 4, the embeddings form distinct, well-separated clusters correspond-ing to anatomical regions (e.g., Lung, Heart, Me-diastinum). This clear separation confirms that the learnable queries effectively disentangle the global 3D features into organ-specific representa-tions, thereby minimizing cross-organ semantic in-terference during the retrieval phase. 

F Additional Qualitative Analysis 

In this section, we provide additional qualitative examples to offer a comprehensive view of our method’s behavior. In Figure 5, the success case demonstrates how retrieving clinically relevant ev-idence allows the model to capture fine-grained details and incidental findings (e.g., specific nod-ule sizes) that are often overlooked by the baseline. 30584 Conversely, the failure case illustrates a limitation of RAG systems, where the retrieval of noisy or irrelevant context can mislead the generator. 

G Prompt Details 

We utilize the standard LLaMA-3.1 chat template to construct the input prompt for our CPR-RAG-based radiology report generation. The full prompt structure is illustrated in Figure 6. 

Visual Prompt. Following prior multimodal LLM baselines, we represent the input CT scan as a fixed-length sequence of visual embeddings V =

{Vi}Li=1 , where L = 32 in our experiments. These visual embeddings are prepended to the textual chat prompt and serve as the image-conditioned prefix for the LLM (see Figure 6). To ensure professional generation quality, we assign the role of an “expert radiologist” in the system instruction. Overall, the prompt consists of four main components: • Visual Prompt: A sequence of visual em-beddings V1, . . . , V32 prepended to the input, providing image evidence to the LLM. • System Instruction: Defines the task and persona (expert radiologist). • Retrieved Context: We inject organ-specific retrieved similar cases into placeholders (e.g., 

Rlung , Rheart ). Each placeholder is replaced with the top-1 retrieved text for the corre-sponding anatomical region. • Task Instruction: Directs the model to gen-erate the final finding report based on the CT  

> Figure 4: Visualization of organ-specific embeddings.
> The t-SNE visualization demonstrates that the learned embeddings successfully disentangle high-dimensional 3D features into distinct anatomical regions.

image and the retrieved references. Special tokens such as <|begin_of_text|> and 

<|start_header_id|> are used to strictly follow the instruction-tuning format of LLaMA-3.1. 30585 Success Case: Detection of Small Nodules (Case ID: valid_1001_a_1 )

Target Finding: Detection of millimetric pulmonary nodules. 

[Ground Truth (GT)] 

“... There are millimetric nonspecific nodules in both lungs. ... No pathologically enlarged lymph nodes were observed.” 

[Baseline (RadFM)] 

“... Aeration of both lung parenchyma is normal and no nodular or infiltrative lesion is detected ...” 

→ False Negative (misses nodules). 

[Retrieved Evidence (CPR; Top-1)] 

Retrieved : “[LUNG]: A nonspecific nodule measuring 5 ×3 mm is observed at the laterobasal level.” 

[RadFM + CPR (Ours)] 

“... No mass or infiltrative lesion ... There are millimetric nonspecific nodules in both lungs. ...” 

Analysis: Retrieval provides a nodule-positive reference, enabling our model to recover GT-positive nodules that the baseline misses. 

Failure Case: Retrieval-induced False Positive (Case ID: valid_1142_a_1 )

Target Finding: Pulmonary nodules (should be absent in GT). 

[Ground Truth (GT)] 

“No suspicious mass or nodular space-occupying le-sion was observed in the lung parenchyma.” 

[Baseline (RadFM)] 

“... Aeration of both lung parenchyma is normal and no nodular or infiltrative lesion is detected ...” 

→ True Negative. 

[Retrieved Evidence (CPR; Top-1)] 

Retrieved : “[LUNG]: Millimetrically sized nonspecific nodules are observed in both lungs.” 

[RadFM + CPR (Ours)] 

“A few stable non-specific pulmonary nodules with diameters less than 3 mm are observed in both lungs.” 

Analysis: Noisy retrieved context introduces a positive nodule cue, which leads to a retrieval-induced false positive. 

Figure 5: Additional qualitative analysis. (Top) Retrieval helps recover GT-positive nodules missed by the baseline. (Bottom) Noisy retrieval induces a false positive in the generated report. 30586 CPR-augmented Prompt Template (LLaMA-3.1 Chat Format) 

[Visual Prompt] 

[V1][ V2] · · · [V32 ]

[System] 

<|begin_of_text|><|start_header_id|>system<|end_header_id|> You are an expert radiologist. Generate a CT finding report. Use the retrieved similar cases as important references for your diagnosis. If similar cases show abnormalities, carefully check if the current scan has similar findings. <|eot_id|> 

[User + Retrieved Context] 

<|start_header_id|>user<|end_header_id|> Similar cases from database: [LUNG]: { Rlung }[HEART]: { Rheart }[MEDIASTINUM]: { Rmediastinum }[PLEURA]: { Rpleura }[TRACHEA]: { Rtrachea }Based on the CT image and the similar cases above, generate the finding report. <|eot_id|> 

[Assistant] 

<|start_header_id|>assistant<|end_header_id|> {Generated Report} 

Figure 6: The prompt template used for CPR-augmented report generation. Visual embeddings Vi are prepended to the text prompt. Retrieved contexts Rorgan are injected per anatomical region. 30587