Title: Learning to Predict Future-Aligned Research Proposals with Language Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.27146

Published Time: Wed, 08 Apr 2026 00:20:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
# Learning to Predict Future-Aligned Research Proposals with Language Models 

Heng Wang, Pengcheng Jiang, Jiashuo Sun, Zhiyi Shi, Haofei Yu , Jiawei Han , Heng Ji 

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 

{heng6, hanj, hengji}@illinois.edu 

Abstract 

Large language models (LLMs) are increas-ingly used to assist ideation in research, but evaluating the quality of LLM-generated re-search proposals remains difficult: novelty and soundness are hard to measure automatically, and large-scale human evaluation is costly. We propose a verifiable alternative by reframing proposal generation as a time-sliced scientific forecasting problem. Given a research ques-tion and inspiring papers available before a cut-off time, the model generates a structured pro-posal and is evaluated by whether it anticipates research directions that appear in papers pub-lished after the time. We operationalize this ob-jective with the Future Alignment Score (FAS), computed via retrieval and LLM-based seman-tic scoring against a held-out future corpus. To train models, we build a time-consistent dataset of 17,771 papers from targets and their pre-cutoff citations, and synthesize reasoning traces that teach gap identification and inspiration bor-rowing. Across Llama-3.1 and Qwen2.5 mod-els, future-aligned tuning improves future align-ment over unaligned baselines (up to +10.6% overall FAS), and domain-expert human eval-uation corroborates improved proposal quality. Finally, we demonstrate practical impact by implementing two model-generated proposals with a code agent, obtaining 4.17% accuracy gain on MATH from a new prompting strat-egy and consistent improvements for a novel model-merging method. 

1 Introduction 

Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly used to assist researchers in idea exploration, lit-erature synthesis, and research proposal draft-ing (Wang et al., 2024a; Si et al., 2025). Recent systems can identify potential research gaps (Liu et al., 2026), estimate or generate experimental out-comes (Wen et al., 2025), and even produce end-to-end papers and code (Lu et al., 2024; Yu et al., Inspiring Papers S            

> Research Question q
> LLM Generator
> 𝑓 𝑞 ,𝑆 →𝑃 '
> True Future Papers
> Past Literature ( 𝑡 ≤𝑡 !)
> Retrieval
> retrieve top -k
> Future Corpus ( 𝑡 >𝑡 !)
> Alignment
> Evaluation
> Generated
> Proposal 𝑃 '

Figure 1: Given inspiring papers S and a research ques-tion q available before a cutoff time tC , the model gen-erates a proposal ˜P . We evaluate whether the proposal anticipates future human research directions by compar-ing it against papers published after tC using retrieval and LLM-based semantic alignment. 

2025a,b), raising the possibility that LLMs could meaningfully accelerate scientific discovery. How-ever, it remains unclear how to train and compare such systems at scale because there is no reliable automated objective for assessing the quality of generated research proposals. This difficulty stems from the nature of proposal generation itself. Unlike question answering or summarization, research proposal generation has no single ground-truth output. Key attributes of a strong proposal—such as novelty, technical sound-ness, feasibility, and long-term impact—are subjec-tive and often only verifiable retrospectively. As a result, automatic metrics, including LLM-based judges, are only weakly aligned with these proper-ties, while human evaluation is costly, inconsistent, and difficult to scale (Si et al., 2026a). Conse-quently, it remains unclear what learning objective should guide models toward generating genuinely useful proposals rather than merely fluent and in-ternally consistent text. To address this challenge, we reframe proposal generation as a time-sliced scientific forecasting 

problem (Figure 1). Instead of directly optimizing subjective notions such as novelty or creativity, we ask a verifiable question: can a model generate proposals that anticipate research directions later pursued by human researchers? Concretely, given 1

> arXiv:2603.27146v2 [cs.CL] 6 Apr 2026

a research question q and inspiring papers S avail-able before a cutoff time tC , the model generates a structured proposal and is evaluated by its seman-tic alignment with papers published after tC . If a proposal aligns strongly with future publications, it suggests that the model has captured research tra-jectories that later proved scientifically meaningful, rather than merely producing arbitrary creative text. We therefore treat future alignment as a scalable surrogate for proposal quality. We operationalize this idea with the Future Alignment Score (FAS) , defined as the maximum semantic alignment between a generated proposal and top retrieved papers from a held-out future corpus, computed via retrieval and LLM-based se-mantic scoring. By turning proposal generation into a forecasting task in semantic space, this for-mulation provides a scalable automatic evaluation signal grounded in publication timelines. To enable learning under this objective, we con-struct large-scale time-consistent supervision from published papers. For each target paper, we extract a leakage-controlled research question and a set of inspiring citations, then synthesize a structured pro-posal that simulates a plausible pre-publication re-search plan. Beyond final proposal text, the model must also learn how to transform prior work into a new research direction by identifying gaps in the literature and repurposing useful ideas, which is a necessary process in human research. To cap-ture this process, we synthesize citation-grounded reasoning traces and introduce stepwise reasoning supervision that decomposes proposal generation into stages of problem formulation, method design, and experimental planning. Experiments show that future-aligned supervi-sion consistently improves future alignment over baselines, and ablation studies demonstrate that stepwise reasoning supervision yields additional gains. We further validate this framework be-yond FAS: domain-expert human evaluation shows that Stepwise CoT proposals are preferred over prompting baselines across soundness, excitement, and overall assessment, while remaining compet-itive with human-derived proposals. Finally, to test whether generated proposals translate into exe-cutable research, we implement two proposals pro-duced by our best model in an LLM-assisted coding environment, obtaining measurable improvements compared to baselines. Our contributions can be summarized as: • We introduce a time-sliced formulation of re-search proposal generation that evaluates pro-posals by their semantic match to future pub-lished papers, providing a scalable automatic sig-nal grounded in future publications. • We construct time-consistent supervision from published papers and their pre-cutoff citations, producing a dataset of 17,771 machine learning papers and synthesizing structured proposal tar-gets and reasoning traces that capture gap analy-sis and inspiration borrowing. • Across multiple LLM families, supervised fine-tuning substantially improves future alignment, and domain-expert human evaluation corrobo-rates improvements in perceived proposal qual-ity; we further demonstrate practical impact by implementing two model-generated proposals. 

2 Method 

Research proposal generation is difficult to evalu-ate and supervise at scale. We address this with a future-aligned learning framework (Figure 2) built on three key ideas: (1) future alignment as a verifiable surrogate for proposal quality, (2) time-consistent supervision synthesized from historical papers without future leakage, and (3) citation-grounded stepwise reasoning that decomposes pro-posal generation into staged scientific planning. 

2.1 Future-Aligned Proposal Prediction 

We formulate research proposal generation as a time-sliced learning problem over scientific papers. Let C denote a time-stamped corpus, where each paper p has publication time tp. For a target paper 

Y published after cutoff time tC , papers with tp ≤

tC are treated as observable context, while papers with tp > t C form a held-out future corpus. For each target paper Y , we construct an input instance (q, S ), where q is a research question de-rived from Y and S is a set of inspiring papers se-lected from its references. Given (q, S ), the model generates a structured proposal ˆP : (q, S ) → ˆP .Rather than reconstructing Y , the goal is to gen-erate a proposal that anticipates research directions later realized in the future literature. We represent ˆP using a structured schema con-sisting of Research Question , Hypothesis , Pro-posed Method , Novelty Claims , and Experimental Details , enabling both complete proposal genera-tion and fine-grained evaluation. 22.2 Verifiable Learning Objective 

Directly optimizing subjective notions such as nov-elty or creativity is difficult to scale, so we use 

future alignment as a verifiable surrogate objective. Let 

Cfuture = {p ∈ C | tp > t C }

denote the future corpus. Given a generated pro-posal ˆP , we first retrieve a candidate set of future papers using embedding similarity. Let e(·) denote the embedding model, and let Rk( ˆP ) denote the top-k retrieved future papers for ˆP :

Rk( ˆP ) = TopK p∈C future cos  e( ˆP ), e (p).

We then score the semantic alignment between ˆP

and each retrieved paper p using an LLM judge, denoted by sllm ( ˆP , p ). The Future Alignment Score (FAS) is defined as 

FAS( ˆP ) = max   

> p∈R k( ˆP)

sllm ( ˆP , p ).

FAS measures whether a proposal aligns strongly with at least one plausible future research direction. Since proposals are structured, we also compute component-level FAS for fine-grained analysis of hypotheses, methods, novelty claims, and experi-mental plans. Because FAS is not directly differen-tiable, in Section 2.3 we construct time-consistent supervision from historical papers as a tractable proxy for this objective. 

Component-level Future Alignment Since pro-posals are structured, we also compute alignment separately for each component, which enables fine-grained analysis of whether a model better antici-pates future hypotheses, methods, novelty claims, or experimental plans. 

2.3 Time-Consistent Supervision from Historical Papers 

To optimize for the FAS objective, we construct supervision from historical papers by converting published papers together with their cited previous papers into time-consistent training data. Given a target paper Y and cutoff time tC , we construct 

q = gq(Y ), S = gS (Y, t C ), ˜P = gP (Y, S ),

where q is a leakage-controlled research question, 

S is a set of historically available inspiring papers, and ˜P is a structured proposal target consistent with that context. 

Research Question Extraction. We derive q

from Y using a prompt that suppresses leakage of key ideas and details, so that q resembles a plau-sible pre-publication problem statement. 

Inspiring Paper Construction Let Refs( Y ) de-note the references of Y . We construct S with a coarse-to-fine procedure: a lightweight heuristic first selects a shortlist Stop (Y ), and an LLM-based selector then chooses the final inspiring papers, 

S = gLLM (Y, S top (Y )) ,

favoring citations likely to have served as genuine inspirations rather than peripheral references. 

Proposal Target Synthesis Given (q, S ), we syn-thesize a forward-looking structured proposal ˜P

containing a hypothesis, method, novelty claims, and experimental plan, yielding supervised pairs 

(q, S ) → ˜P that provide scalable supervision while preserving the temporal asymmetry between observed prior literature and held-out future out-comes. 

2.4 Citation-Grounded Reasoning Traces 

Reasoning is a core part of scientific ideation: hu-man researchers form proposals by analyzing gaps in prior work, borrowing and recombining ideas from existing papers, and refining these insights into methods and experiments. Supervising only the final proposal therefore misses an important part of the learning problem. To better capture this process, we synthesize citation-grounded rea-soning traces that model how inspiring papers S

are transformed into a new proposal through gap identification and inspiration borrowing. We further introduce Stepwise CoT SFT , a more fine-grained form of reasoning supervision. Instead of placing reasoning in a single monolithic block, Stepwise CoT interleaves reasoning with proposal construction in three stages: (1) gap analysis and inspiration borrowing for research question and hypothesis generation, (2) method reasoning for the 

proposed method , and (3) experimental planning 

for experimental details . This formulation teaches proposal generation as staged scientific planning rather than one-shot text continuation, and forms the main reasoning component of our framework. For comparison, we also consider two simpler supervision formats. In CoT SFT , the entire rea-soning trace is placed before the proposal as a sin-gle block: (q, S ) 7 → (R, ˜P ), where R contains 3Time -consistent S upervision                 

> from Historical Papers Citation -grounded S tepwise Reasoning
> ?
> Target Paper 𝑌
> Inspiring Papers S
> Research Question q
> Structured 𝑃 #
> ?Research Question q
> Inspiring Papers S
> RQ & Hypo.
> Gap &
> Inspiration
> Exp.
> LLM Generator
> 𝑓 𝑞 ,𝑆 →𝑃 #Retrieve in
> Future Paper Corpus
> LLM judge scoring
> (FAS)
> Generated Proposals
> Evaluation Framework
> (q, S, 𝑃 #)
> SFT
> LLM
> Generator
> Method
> Reasoning
> Method Exp.
> Planning
> Reasoning Synthesis
> Execution with
> Code Agent
> Human Eval.

Figure 2: Overview of the proposed future-aligned learning framework. Time-consistent supervision constructs training data from historical papers without future leakage, and citation-grounded stepwise reasoning decomposes proposal generation into staged scientific planning. Together, these enable LoRA-based supervised fine-tuning of a proposal generator, which is evaluated by Future Alignment Score (FAS) against a held-out future corpus and further validated through human evaluation and execution-based case studies. 

gap analysis and inspiration borrowing. In Direct SFT , the model is trained to generate structured proposals without intermediate reasoning traces. All reasoning traces are synthesized using a strong reasoning language model, and formatting details and prompt templates are provided in Ap-pendix D.4. 

3 Experiments 

3.1 Experimental Setup Corpus and Temporal Split Our corpus con-sists of papers from major machine learning venues (NeurIPS, ICML, and ICLR). Papers from 2024 are used to construct training supervision, while papers from 2025 serve as future evaluation targets. We randomly sample 2,823 training instances and 819 evaluation instances. 

Evaluation We encode generated proposals and future papers using text-embedding-3-large (Ope-nAI, 2024), retrieve the top-k future candidates with k = 10 , and use GPT-4.1-mini (OpenAI, 2025a) as the semantic judge for Future Alignment Score (1-10 scale with detailed rubrics). We demon-strate that the evaluation is robust to retrieval depth 

k, embedding models, and LLM judge selection in Appendix B. 

Models and Training Setup We evalu-ate Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct, Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct (Yang et al., 2024), and Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct (Grattafiori et al., 2024) under both prompting and supervised fine-tuning regimes. For supervised training, we fine-tune each model on the synthesized proposal supervision using LoRA adapters (Hu et al., 2022). We set the generation temperature to 0.7 for inference. 

3.2 Baselines Prompting Baselines We consider three input configurations: (1) Research Question Only: the model receives only q. (2) Papers Only: the model receives only the inspiring papers S. (3) Research Question + Papers: the full input (q, S ).

Baselines from Prior Paradigms Since future-aligned proposal prediction is a new task formula-tion, there is no existing method designed for the same input/output setting. We therefore include adapted baselines that represent the closest prior paradigms: (1) AI-Researcher (Si et al., 2025): generates research proposals by first producing several seed research ideas grounded in retrieved literature, ex-panding them into full proposals, then using an LLM ranker to rank the proposals. (2) Chain-of-Ideas (CoI) : (Li et al., 2025) CoI models the evolution of research ideas through chains of related papers and predicts future research directions before generating a candidate idea and experimental design. 

Supervised Training Regimes Our main super-vised training method is Future-aligned SFT + Stepwise CoT , which fine-tunes the model on syn-thesized proposals augmented with interleaved rea-soning traces aligned to proposal components. To isolate the contribution of reasoning supervision, we also consider two ablated variants: w/o rea-soning traces , which removes intermediate reason-ing and trains only on structured proposal targets (Direct SFT), and w/o stepwise , which retains rea-soning supervision but places it in a single block before the proposal rather than distributing it across the generation process (CoT SFT). 4Table 1: Main results (FAS; higher is better) for future-aligned proposal prediction. We report component-wise FAS along with the overall FAS. Future-aligned SFT improves the FAS substantially over the unaligned baselines, while synthetic structured reasoning trace supervision provides additional gains, improving the overall score by 10.6%.                                                                                                                              

> Method Hypothesis Proposed Method Novelty Claims Exp. Details Overall Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct
> RQ only 63.0 52.8 51.1 52.4 60.0 Paper only 55.2 49.4 46.9 48.0 52.4 Prompting 64.5 56.8 54.4 55.0 62.1 AI-Researcher 57.9 46.0 45.1 44.4 53.7 Chain-of-Ideas 63.2 54.1 51.6 45.9 59.3
> Ours (Future-aligned SFT + Stepwise CoT) 68.1 61.0 58.7 51.9 65.3
> w/o reasoning traces 66.7 58.3 56.9 54.6 64.1 w/o stepwise 67.2 59.2 57.6 55.1 65.0
> Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct
> RQ only 66.7 56.6 55.2 52.0 63.3 Paper only 56.4 50.5 46.6 47.2 52.9 Prompting 66.3 57.8 55.1 54.8 63.6 AI-Researcher 58.0 47.5 45.6 44.8 54.1 Chain-of-Ideas 62.0 53.2 50.3 47.1 59.3
> Ours (Future-aligned SFT + Stepwise CoT) 68.7 60.5 59.1 54.9 66.5
> w/o reasoning traces 67.9 60.0 58.7 54.9 65.3 w/o stepwise 68.3 60.2 59.2 54.8 65.9
> Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct
> RQ only 65.8 56.4 54.4 53.6 62.6 Paper only 54.3 49.3 45.6 46.6 51.3 Prompting 65.8 57.1 55.1 55.6 63.0 AI-Researcher 58.5 48.1 46.0 45.0 55.3 Chain-of-Ideas 63.8 54.7 52.1 46.8 60.8
> Ours (Future-aligned SFT + Stepwise CoT) 71.4 63.5 61.8 56.7 69.7
> w/o reasoning traces 68.0 60.0 58.9 55.1 65.1 w/o stepwise 68.7 60.0 58.2 56.8 66.1

3.3 Main Results 

As shown in Table 1, our full method achieves the best overall FAS across all three backbones. Rel-ative to standard prompting with the same base model, the gains are consistent on Llama-3.1-8B (+5.2% overall FAS), Qwen2.5-7B (+4.6%), and especially Qwen2.5-14B (+10.6%), indicating that future-aligned supervision is effective across scales and that larger models benefit most from the ad-ditional training signal. These results indicate that future-aligned supervision substantially im-proves proposal generation relative to inference-time prompting alone. Appendix C presents quali-tative case studies that illustrate the proposal differ-ences underlying these FAS improvements. The ablations further clarify where these gains come from. Removing reasoning traces ( w/o rea-soning traces ) already reduces performance on all three backbones, and replacing stepwise reason-ing with a single monolithic reasoning block ( w/o stepwise ) leads to a further drop in FAS. This pat-tern is strongest on Qwen2.5-14B, where the full method reaches 69.7 overall FAS, compared with 66.1 for w/o stepwise and 65.1 for w/o reasoning traces . The component-level results show that the gains are concentrated on Hypothesis and Proposed Method , while Experimental Details improves less consistently. For example, on Qwen2.5-14B, the full method improves Hypothesis from 68.0 to 71.4 and Proposed Method from 60.0 to 63.5 relative to 

w/o reasoning traces , whereas Experimental De-tails changes more modestly (55.1 to 56.7). This suggests that citation-grounded stepwise reason-ing mainly helps the reasoning-intensive stages of proposal generation, especially problem formula-tion and method design. While improvements are consistent, gains on experimental design are more modest, suggesting that planning realistic experi-ments remains challenging. We also compare against adapted baselines from prior ideation paradigms, including AI-Researcher and Chain-of-Ideas. These methods consistently underperform direct prompting under our future-alignment metric. On Qwen2.5-14B, for instance, AI-Researcher reaches 55.3 overall FAS, and Chain-of-Ideas reaches 60.8, both below standard prompting (63.0) and well below our full method (69.7). We stress, however, that these systems are 5vs Human                   

> vs Prompting
> 41.7% 16.7% 41.7%
> 43.3% 51.7%
> Overall
> vs Human
> vs Prompting
> 45.0% 18.3% 36.7%
> 40.0% 11.7% 48.3%
> Soundness
> 020 40 60 80 100
> Percentage of pairs (%)
> vs Human
> vs Prompting
> 36.7% 30.0% 33.3%
> 33.3% 16.7% 50.0%
> Excitement
> Lose Tie Win

Figure 3: Pairwise human evaluation results (win/tie/lose). Each stacked bar shows the fraction of instances where Stepwise CoT is preferred (win), the two proposals are judged equivalent (tie), or Stepwise CoT is not preferred (lose), aggregated by majority vote across three annotators. 

designed for broader open-ended ideation rather than the forecasting-style objective studied here. Their lower FAS should therefore be interpreted specifically with respect to future alignment, not as a universal judgment of proposal quality. Neverthe-less, the comparison shows that performance gains in our setting come from future-aligned supervi-sion rather than from more elaborate prompting workflows alone. Finally, the input ablations highlight the impor-tance of problem specification. Using only the research question remains reasonably competitive, while using only inspiring papers is consistently much weaker across all models. On Qwen2.5-14B, for example, RQ-only achieves 62.6 over-all FAS, close to full prompting at 63.0, whereas Paper-only drops to 51.3. This suggests that the research question provides the main high-level con-straint for proposal generation, while inspiring pa-pers contribute complementary information that becomes most useful when the model is trained to exploit them through future-aligned supervision and citation-grounded reasoning. 

3.4 Human Evaluation 

To examine whether improvements in Future Align-ment Score (FAS) correspond to stronger propos-als under expert judgment, we conduct a pairwise human study comparing proposals generated by our Qwen2.5-14B Stepwise CoT model against (i) human-derived proposals from published papers and (ii) prompting-only proposals. Each pair is written for the same research question, and all pro-posals are in the format defined in Section 2.1. An-notators evaluate each pair along three dimensions: soundness, excitement, and overall assessment. We annotate 120 pairs in total (60 per comparison), each judged by three domain-expert graduate stu-dents with prior conference reviewing experience; judgments are aggregated by majority vote. As shown in Figure 3, Stepwise CoT is competi-tive with human-derived proposals overall (25 wins / 10 ties / 25 losses). This suggests that propos-als with high future alignment can also be judged favorably by human experts, supporting FAS as a meaningful—though not exhaustive—surrogate for proposal quality. This comparison also exhibits a relatively high tie rate, especially for excitement (18 ties out of 60), and low unanimity (5–12%), indicating that distinctions between strong model-generated and human-derived proposals can be sub-tle even for expert annotators. Compared to prompting-only proposals, Step-wise CoT is preferred more often across all dimen-sions. This mirrors the gains observed under FAS and provides complementary evidence that higher future alignment is associated with improvements in expert-perceived proposal quality, rather than merely better matching to the future corpus. This comparison also shows substantially higher una-nimity (26.7–31.7%), indicating more consistent annotator preferences when distinguishing Step-wise CoT from prompting baselines. 

3.5 Executable Proposal Case Studies 

To assess whether generated proposals correspond to executable research ideas, we implement two high-FAS proposals produced by our best model. We provide the machine-generated proposals di-rectly to a code agent, which follows the proposed methodology with minor human assistance. Full implementation details and results are provided in Appendix A. 

Prompting Strategy Proposal introduces aprompting technique 1 based on a meta strategy se-lector over deductive, inductive, abductive, and enu-merative reasoning. Rather than relying on a sin-gle reasoning chain, it explores multiple strategies and selects an answer by agreement-based scoring. This combination goes beyond the prompting meth-ods available in the input context, and improves MATH accuracy by 4.17% over baselines. 

Model Merging Proposal introduces MALS (Merging by Adaptive Layerwise Sparsity Alloca-tion), a model merging method that addresses con-

> 1Because the model only has access to papers up to 2024, novelty here is defined relative to research appearing in 2025.

6LLM Reasoning is Strategy Search Merging by Adaptive Layerwise Sparsity Allocation          

> Research Q: Research Q:
> Can LLMs improve reasoning by dynamically selecting among diverse
> strategies rather than relying primarily on deductive chains?
> Searching over reasoning strategies (deductive, inductive, abductive,
> probabilistic) improves performance over CoT and self -consistency.
> The LLM first generates candidate reasoning strategies for a
> problem. A lightweight scoring function selects a strategy, executes
> it, and iteratively switches strategies if confidence is low.
> The framework is model -agnostic and requires no additional training.
> Evaluate on GPT -4T logical reasoning tasks, MATH, and BBH.
> Baselines include CoT and self -consistency prompting.
> Ablations analyze strategy diversity and scoring mechanisms.
> Hypothesis :
> Experiment:
> Method:
> How can model merging for multitask learning reduce conflicts and
> interference between task -specific models?
> Adaptive sparsity guided by a conflict metric reduces task
> interference and improves merged model performance.
> Compute task vectors as differences between fine -tuned and base
> weights. Define a conflict metric based on correlation between task
> updates. Solve a per -layer optimization that allocates sparsity to
> minimize conflict using a SparseGPT -style solver. Construct the
> merged model by combining pruned task vectors with base weights.
> Merge 21 Alpaca -style models across tasks (math, code, reasoning,
> QA). Baselines: uniform sparsification , TIES -Merging, evolutionary
> merging. Evaluate on language and vision models ( ViT -B/16 on
> CIFAR -100/ImageNet) and analyze sparsity levels and task scaling.
> Hypothesis :
> Method:
> Experiment:

Figure 4: Two proposals generated by Qwen2.5-14B- Instruct (stepwise CoT tuned). The content is summarized for readability. The proposals are textually sound and are turned into reasonable experimental results and findings with the implementation and execution of code agents. Table 2: Citation-type ablation: ∆ FAS (Ablation −

Baseline) by proposal component. 

Ablation Type Hyp. Method Novelty Overall 

background ( n=775) −6.75 −7.21 −8.31 −6.59 method ( n=765) −6.93 −7.37 −8.35 −6.63 

benchmark ( n=248) −6.41 −6.85 −7.30 −6.13 

flicts in task-vector sparsification. Instead of using uniform sparsification, MALS estimates layerwise conflict from cross-task correlation and sign dis-agreement, then allocates sparsity adaptively across layers. This conflict-aware design goes beyond ex-isting heuristic sparsification strategies and yields strong reasoning performance on Mistral-7B. These case studies provide qualitative evidence that optimizing for future alignment can produce proposals that are practically implementable. More importantly, it indicates the potential that our model can be incorporated into a fully automated end-to-end research assistant system. 

4 Analysis 

4.1 Citation Sensitivity by Citation Type 

To understand whether the model genuinely lever-ages inspiring papers rather than generating generic proposals, we perform a citation sensitivity analy-sis using type-aware ablations. We categorize each inspiring citation in S into three coarse types based on its role in the original paper: Foundational/Back-ground (theoretical context and problem framing), 

Method/Technical (inspiring techniques or com-ponents), and Benchmark/Experimental (datasets, evaluation metrics, or experimental protocols). We label inspiring papers for all 819 test in-stances (4,084 papers total) using GPT-4.1-mini. Papers may receive multiple labels, and 43.5% fall into more than one category. Background and method citations are common (72.1% and 62.8% of inspiring papers, respectively), while benchmark citations are relatively rare (9.2%). For each instance, we generate a proposal ˆP

using our best-performing model with the full in-spiring set S, and then remove all citations of a given type t before regenerating: 

ˆP (−t) = f  q, S \ S(t),

where S(t) ⊆ S denotes the subset of inspiring papers labeled with type t. Sensitivity is measured by the drop in Future Alignment Score (FAS). We report results only on instances where the removed citation type is present. As shown in Table 2, removing either back-ground or method citations leads to a similar degra-dation in overall FAS (both around a 9.6% drop), suggesting that contextual framing and technical inspiration contribute comparably to forecasting future research directions. At the component level, 

Novelty Claims are the most sensitive to citation removal across all citation types ( ∆FAS between 

−7.3 and −8.3), indicating that inspiring papers help the model articulate distinctive contributions relative to prior work. Removing benchmark cita-tions has the smallest effect on overall alignment (an 8.9% drop on instances containing such ci-tations), suggesting that conceptual framing and methodological inspiration play a larger role than explicit benchmark references in anticipating future research trajectories. 7Table 3: Multi-dimensional LLM judge evaluation (1–5 scale). Future-aligned tuned models consistently out-perform the baselines, while the Stepwise-CoT model achieves the highest scores on all three dimensions.                             

> Model Resource Task–Method Task–Exp. Avg.
> Prompting 3.26 3.20 2.99 3.15 CoI 3.52 3.20 3.12 3.28 AI-Researcher 3.30 3.13 3.03 3.16
> Future-aligned SFT 3.63 3.42 3.21 3.42
> w/o reasoning traces 3.54 3.41 3.16 3.37
> w/o stepwise 3.39 3.30 3.07 3.25

4.2 Multi-Dimensional LLM-Based Judging 

While FAS measures predictive alignment with fu-ture research, it does not directly assess the struc-tural quality and feasibility of generated proposals. We therefore conduct an additional evaluation us-ing an LLM-based judge across three dimensions: 

Resource Validity , Task–Method Consistency , and 

Task–Experiment Consistency . Each dimension is scored on a 1–5 scale (higher is better). The full LLM judge prompt is provided in Appendix D.7. As illustrated in Table 3, the Stepwise-CoT model achieves the highest scores on all three di-mensions, indicating that structured reasoning su-pervision improves not only the coherence of gen-erated proposals but also the validity of required resources and the consistency between proposed tasks, methods, and evaluation protocols. Across models, Task–Experiment Consistency 

receives the lowest scores (approximately 3.0–3.2), suggesting that designing experiments that prop-erly evaluate the proposed task remains challeng-ing for current language models. Nevertheless, all future-aligned fine-tuned models outperform baseline approaches such as Chain-of-Ideas and AI-Researcher, demonstrating that future-aligned supervision improves both proposal feasibility and methodological consistency. 

5 Related Work 

LLM for Research Ideation and Scientific Assis-tance Recent work has explored the use of large language models as research assistants for acceler-ating scientific discovery in various domains. Many works focus on partial processes in scientific dis-covery, such as idea generation (Wang et al., 2024a; Chen et al., 2025; Si et al., 2025; Pu et al., 2025; Xu et al., 2026), literature synthesis (Wang et al., 2019, 2024b), idea implementation (Jansen et al., 2025; Si et al., 2026a,b), and paper reviewing (D’Arcy et al., 2024; Liang et al., 2024; Zhu et al., 2025). Another line of work focuses on end-to-end scien-tific workflow, such as building multi-agent sys-tems to simulate scientific workflow (Yu et al., 2025a) or automate the research pipeline to produce a full research paper (Lu et al., 2024; Schmidgall et al., 2025; Schmidgall and Moor, 2025; Gottweis et al., 2025; Yamada et al., 2025; Miyai et al., 2026). Benchmarks have also been created to evaluate re-search agents on research tasks (e.g. research cod-ing) (Tian et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024; Nathani et al., 2025; Chan et al., 2025; Weng et al., 2025). Our work instead focuses on scalable training and evaluation for proposal generation. 

Scientific Forecasting and Predictive Evalua-tion A growing body of work studies whether language models can predict future scientific out-comes, trends, or empirical results. For example, Luo et al. (2025) use LLMs to predict neuroscience results. Wen et al. (2025) investigate forecasting empirical AI research outcomes with LLMs, while other datasets analyze innovation patterns and sci-entific reasoning from historical research trajec-tories (Liu et al., 2026). Other works also try to predict trending research topics (Gu and Krenn, 2024; Liu et al., 2026) or generate the future works section of a paper (Al Azher et al., 2025). Recently, Ajith et al. (2026) create a benchmark to evalu-ate scientific forecasting across the entire research workflow (from team formation to impact predic-tion). Our work is inspired by this line of research and introduces the future alignment objective for proposal generation. 

6 Conclusion 

We introduce future-aligned research proposal pre-diction, a formulation that evaluates generated pro-posals by whether they anticipate research direc-tions appearing in future publications. We con-struct a time-consistent dataset derived from pub-lished papers and their citations, and propose the Future Alignment Score (FAS) to measure seman-tic alignment between generated proposals and a held-out future corpus. Experiments show that future-aligned supervised fine-tuning substantially improves predictive alignment over baselines, with structured reasoning supervision providing addi-tional gains. Complementary evaluations with LLM-based judging, human comparisons, and exe-cutable case studies suggest that the resulting pro-posals are coherent, feasible, and practically imple-mentable. These results highlight the potential of time-grounded evaluation signals for training lan-guage models to better assist scientific exploration. 8Limitations 

Limited Evaluation Domain The dataset and evaluation are strictly limited to machine learning papers from NeurIPS, ICML, and ICLR. The struc-tural norms of ML papers are highly specific and of-ten follow predictable incremental trajectories (e.g., applying existing methods to new benchmarks). It is unclear how this framework would generalize to other scientific domains with different citation cultures or slower publication cycles. 

Biased Objective FAS measures similarity to fu-ture published directions, which does not directly capture novelty or scientific correctness and may under-reward genuinely novel ideas that didn’t get published. For instance, a strong proposal that is original but not realized in the future litera-ture could be unfairly scored poorly. Although we validate FAS with human evaluation and multi-dimensional LLM judge evaluation, the framework could still be biased to some extent. We therefore treat it as a proxy rather than a complete measure of research quality. 

Data Synthesis and Supervision Many steps in the data synthesis process involve LLM usage, such as inspiring paper selection and reasoning trace generation, which could introduce model bias and errors. 

Ethical Statement 

A potential risk of proposal-generation systems is dual use: models that can draft plausible research plans could be misused to accelerate harmful or unethical research. Our experiments focus on main-stream machine learning topics and do not target domains that are inherently hazardous. We also emphasize that future alignment is not equivalent to novelty, correctness, or societal benefit; propos-als that align with future publications may still be unhelpful or inappropriate, and proposals that do not align may still be valuable. Any deployment of such systems should include human oversight, domain-specific safety checks, and additional re-view for harmful content or unsafe experimental recommendations. Moreover, our evaluation relies in part on LLM-based judges and tool-assisted verification, which may reflect model biases or errors. We mitigate this by using fixed prompts and deterministic set-tings where possible, reporting uncertainty through confidence intervals in human studies, and treat-ing the tool-assisted checks as analysis rather than definitive ground truth. 

Acknowledgements 

The authors would like to thank Hui Ren, Xue-jun Zhang, Jiateng Liu, Jeonghwan Kim, Yanjun Zhao, Bingxuan Li, Xueqiang Xu, Haojin Wang, and Chenyu Li for helpful discussions and data annotation. This work is based upon work sup-ported by U.S. NSF Molecule Maker Lab Institute, an AI Institute for Molecular Discovery, Synthesis Strategy, and Manufacturing funded by the U.S. National Science Foundation under Awards No. 2019897 and 2505932, and NSF NAIRR award. Any opinions, findings and conclusions or recom-mendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the U.S. Government. The U.S. Gov-ernment is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for governmental purposes notwithstand-ing any copyright annotation therein. 

References                       

> Anirudh Ajith, Amanpreet Singh, Jay DeYoung, Na-dav Kunievsky, Austin C Kozlowski, Oyvind Tafjord, James Evans, Daniel S Weld, Tom Hope, and Doug Downey. 2026. Prescience: A benchmark for forecasting scientific contributions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.20459 .Ibrahim Al Azher, Miftahul Jannat Mokarrama, Zhishuai Guo, Sagnik Ray Choudhury, and Hamed Alhoori. 2025. Futuregen: A rag-based approach to generate the future work of scientific article. In
> 2025 IEEE International Conference on eScience (eScience) , pages 427–438. IEEE. Jun Shern Chan, Neil Chowdhury, Oliver Jaffe, James Aung, Dane Sherburn, Evan Mays, Giulio Starace, Kevin Liu, Leon Maksin, Tejal Patwardhan, Alek-sander Madry, and Lilian Weng. 2025. MLE-bench: Evaluating machine learning agents on machine learning engineering. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Nuo Chen, Yicheng Tong, Jiaying Wu, Minh Duc Duong, Qian Wang, Qingyun Zou, Bryan Hooi, and Bingsheng He. 2025. Beyond brainstorming: What drives high-quality scientific ideas? lessons from multi-agent collaboration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.04575 .Mike D’Arcy, Tom Hope, Larry Birnbaum, and Doug Downey. 2024. Marg: Multi-agent review generation for scientific papers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04259 .

9Juraj Gottweis, Wei-Hung Weng, Alexander Daryin, Tao Tu, Anil Palepu, Petar Sirkovic, Artiom Myaskovsky, Felix Weissenberger, Keran Rong, Ryu-taro Tanno, and 1 others. 2025. Towards an ai co-scientist. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.18864 .Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, and 1 others. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783 .Xuemei Gu and Mario Krenn. 2024. Impact4cast: Forecasting high-impact research topics via machine learning on evolving knowledge graphs. In ICML 2024 AI for Science Workshop .Edward J Hu, yelong shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. 2022. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Qian Huang, Jian Vora, Percy Liang, and Jure Leskovec. 2024. MLAgentbench: Evaluating language agents on machine learning experimentation. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning .Peter Jansen, Oyvind Tafjord, Marissa Radensky, Pao Siangliulue, Tom Hope, Bhavana Dalvi Mishra, Bod-hisattwa Prasad Majumder, Daniel S Weld, and Pe-ter Clark. 2025. CodeScientist: End-to-end semi-automated scientific discovery with code-based ex-perimentation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 13370– 13467, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Men-sch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de Las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, Lélio Re-nard Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timo-thée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. 2023. Mistral 7b. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825 .Long Li, Weiwen Xu, Jiayan Guo, Ruochen Zhao, Xingxuan Li, Yuqian Yuan, Boqiang Zhang, Yum-ing Jiang, Yifei Xin, Ronghao Dang, Yu Rong, Deli Zhao, Tian Feng, and Lidong Bing. 2025. Chain of ideas: Revolutionizing research via novel idea development with LLM agents. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 8971–9004, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Weixin Liang, Yuhui Zhang, Hancheng Cao, Binglu Wang, Daisy Yi Ding, Xinyu Yang, Kailas Vodrahalli, Siyu He, Daniel Scott Smith, Yian Yin, and 1 others. 2024. Can large language models provide useful feedback on research papers? a large-scale empirical analysis. NEJM AI , 1(8):AIoa2400196. Jiachen Liu, Maestro Harmon, and Zechen Zhang. 2026. Sci-reasoning: A dataset decoding ai innovation pat-terns. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.04577 .Chris Lu, Cong Lu, Robert Tjarko Lange, Jakob Foer-ster, Jeff Clune, and David Ha. 2024. The ai scientist: Towards fully automated open-ended scientific dis-covery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06292 .Xiaoliang Luo, Akilles Rechardt, Guangzhi Sun, Kevin K Nejad, Felipe Yáñez, Bati Yilmaz, Kangjoo Lee, Alexandra O Cohen, Valentina Borghesani, An-ton Pashkov, and 1 others. 2025. Large language models surpass human experts in predicting neuro-science results. Nature human behaviour , 9(2):305– 315. Atsuyuki Miyai, Mashiro Toyooka, Takashi Otonari, Zaiying Zhao, and Kiyoharu Aizawa. 2026. Jr. AI scientist and its risk report: Autonomous scientific exploration from a baseline paper. Transactions on Machine Learning Research .Deepak Nathani, Lovish Madaan, Nicholas Roberts, Nikolay Bashlykov, Ajay Menon, Vincent Moens, Mikhail Plekhanov, Amar Budhiraja, Despoina Magka, Vladislav Vorotilov, Gaurav Chaurasia, Dieuwke Hupkes, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Tatiana Shavrina, Jakob Nicolaus Foerster, Yoram Bachrach, William Yang Wang, and Roberta Raileanu. 2025. MLGym: A new framework and benchmark for ad-vancing AI research agents. In Second Conference on Language Modeling .OpenAI. 2024. New embedding models and api updates. https://openai.com/index/ new-embedding-models-and-api-updates/ .Introduces text-embedding-3-large. OpenAI. 2025a. Introducing gpt-4.1 in the api. https: //openai.com/index/gpt-4-1/ . Introduces GPT-4.1, GPT-4.1 mini, and GPT-4.1 nano. OpenAI. 2025b. Introducing gpt-5. https://openai. com/index/introducing-gpt-5/ . Official Ope-nAI model announcement. Kevin Pu, K. J. Kevin Feng, Tovi Grossman, Tom Hope, Bhavana Dalvi Mishra, Matt Latzke, Jonathan Bragg, Joseph Chee Chang, and Pao Siangliulue. 2025. Ideasynth: Iterative research idea develop-ment through evolving and composing idea facets with literature-grounded feedback. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’25, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Samuel Schmidgall and Michael Moor. 2025. Agen-trxiv: Towards collaborative autonomous research. 

Preprint , arXiv:2503.18102. Samuel Schmidgall, Yusheng Su, Ze Wang, Ximeng Sun, Jialian Wu, Xiaodong Yu, Jiang Liu, Michael Moor, Zicheng Liu, and Emad Barsoum. 2025. Agent laboratory: Using llm agents as research assis-tants. Preprint , arXiv:2501.04227. Chenglei Si, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Diyi Yang. 2026a. The ideation-execution gap: Execution out-comes of LLM-generated versus human research 

10 ideas. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Chenglei Si, Diyi Yang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. 2025. Can LLMs generate novel research ideas? a large-scale human study with 100+ NLP researchers. In 

The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Chenglei Si, Zitong Yang, Yejin Choi, Emmanuel Can-dès, Diyi Yang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. 2026b. Towards execution-grounded automated ai research. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.14525 .Minyang Tian, Luyu Gao, Dylan Zhang, Xinan Chen, Cunwei Fan, Xuefei Guo, Roland Haas, Pan Ji, Kit-tithat Krongchon, Yao Li, Shengyan Liu, Di Luo, Yutao Ma, HAO TONG, Kha Trinh, Chenyu Tian, Zihan Wang, Bohao Wu, Shengzhu Yin, and 10 oth-ers. 2024. Scicode: A research coding benchmark curated by scientists. In The Thirty-eight Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track .Qingyun Wang, Doug Downey, Heng Ji, and Tom Hope. 2024a. SciMON: Scientific inspiration machines optimized for novelty. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 279–299, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Qingyun Wang, Lifu Huang, Zhiying Jiang, Kevin Knight, Heng Ji, Mohit Bansal, and Yi Luan. 2019. PaperRobot: Incremental draft generation of scien-tific ideas. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,pages 1980–1991, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics. Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. 2023. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. In 

The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations .Yidong Wang, Qi Guo, Wenjin Yao, Hongbo Zhang, Xin Zhang, Zhen Wu, Meishan Zhang, Xinyu Dai, Min zhang, Qingsong Wen, Wei Ye, Shikun Zhang, and Yue Zhang. 2024b. Autosurvey: Large language models can automatically write surveys. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems .Jiaxin Wen, Chenglei Si, Chen Yueh-Han, He He, and Shi Feng. 2025. Predicting empirical AI research outcomes with language models. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Process-ing Systems .Yixuan Weng, QiYao Sun, Minjun Zhu, and Yue Zhang. 2025. Opendiscovery: A verifiable, creative science problem-solving dataset to forge AI scientists. In 

NeurIPS 2025 AI for Science Workshop .Tengyue Xu, Zhuoyang Qian, Gaoge Liu, Li Ling, Zhen-tao Zhang, Biao Wu, Shuo Zhang, Ke Lu, Wei Shi, Ziqi Wang, and 1 others. 2026. Idea2story: An au-tomated pipeline for transforming research concepts into complete scientific narratives. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.20833 .Prateek Yadav, Derek Tam, Leshem Choshen, Colin Raffel, and Mohit Bansal. 2023. TIES-merging: Re-solving interference when merging models. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Process-ing Systems .Yutaro Yamada, Robert Tjarko Lange, Cong Lu, Shen-gran Hu, Chris Lu, Jakob Foerster, Jeff Clune, and David Ha. 2025. The ai scientist-v2: Workshop-level automated scientific discovery via agentic tree search. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.08066 .An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jian-hong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, and 22 oth-ers. 2024. Qwen2.5 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.15115 .Haofei Yu, Zhaochen Hong, Zirui Cheng, Kunlun Zhu, Keyang Xuan, Jinwei Yao, Tao Feng, and Jiaxuan You. 2025a. Researchtown: Simulator of human research community. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning .Haofei Yu, Keyang Xuan, Fenghai Li, Kunlun Zhu, Zijie Lei, Jiaxun Zhang, Ziheng Qi, Kyle Richardson, and Jiaxuan You. 2025b. TinyScientist: An interactive, extensible, and controllable framework for building research agents. In Proceedings of the 2025 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations , pages 558–590, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Minjun Zhu, Yixuan Weng, Linyi Yang, and Yue Zhang. 2025. DeepReview: Improving LLM-based paper review with human-like deep thinking process. In 

Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 29330–29355, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. 

11 A Details of Implemented Proposals 

We present the detailed implementation and exper-iment results of the two generated proposals. We use Cursor with Claude-4.5-Opus for the imple-mentation. We also include the LLM-generated analysis over the results to demonstrate the poten-tial to build an end-to-end framework that generates the full paper. 

A.1 Strategy Search Implementation We implement Strategy Search, a multi-strategy reasoning framework where the LLM explicitly proposes, executes, and scores mul-tiple reasoning strategies before selecting the best answer. Unlike standard Chain-of-Thought (CoT), which commits to a single deductive reasoning chain, Strategy Search explores four distinct rea-soning modes: Deductive: Apply logical rules step-by-step from premises to conclusion (best for formal proofs, syllogisms) Inductive: Find patterns from examples and generalize (best for sequences, pat-tern recognition) Abductive: Work backward from the desired answer to find the best explanation (best for constraint satisfaction, puzzles) Enumer-ate: Systematically list and check all possibilities (best for combinatorics, small search spaces) The algorithm proceeds in five steps: (1) Propose strategies ranked by applicability, (2) Execute top-k strategies with N reasoning traces each, (3) Score each strategy by agreement ratio among its traces, (4) Select the answer from the highest-scoring strat-egy via majority vote, and (5) optionally Reconcile if confidence is low. We compare against three baselines: (1) Direct zero-shot prompting (1 API call), (2) Chain-of-Thought with greedy decoding (1 API call), and (3) Self-Consistency (Wang et al., 2023) with k = 5 

samples (5 API calls). Strategy Search uses approx-imately 14 API calls per problem (1 proposal + 4 strategies × 3 samples + meta-check). 

Experimental Setup We evaluate on three bench-marks: GSM8K (grade-school math), MATH (com-petition mathematics), and BBH (BIG-Bench Hard logical reasoning, 8 subtasks). All experiments use gpt-4o-mini with 100 examples per benchmark and a fixed seed for reproducibility. 

Results Table 5 presents our main findings. Strat-egy Search achieves the best performance on MATH (50%), outperforming Self-Consistency by 2 percentage points. This improvement comes from problems where non-deductive strategies suc-ceed—the enumerate strategy, when selected (10% of cases), achieves 60% accuracy on MATH prob-lems. However, Strategy Search underperforms on BBH (88% vs. 92% for Self-Consistency), suggest-ing that for tasks well-suited to deductive reason-ing, explicit strategy diversification can introduce noise. A surprising finding is that direct prompt-ing (93%) outperforms Chain-of-Thought (89%) on GSM8K, consistent with recent observations that capable models may introduce errors through verbose reasoning on simple problems. 

A.2 Model Merging Implementation We implement MALS (Merg-ing by Adaptive Layerwise Sparsity Allocation), a model merging algorithm that adaptively allocates sparsity across layers based on task conflict met-rics. The core idea is to assign higher sparsity to high-conflict layers (where task vectors interfere) while preserving capacity in low-conflict layers. The core of MALS is a three-stage procedure: (1) compute per-layer conflict scores, (2) compute per-layer importance scores, (3) solve a constrained allocation problem that distributes sparsity non-uniformly across layers, specifically, given T task vectors {τi}Ti=1 , where each task vector is defined as τi = θft  

> i

− θpre (difference between parameters of fine-tuned and pre-trained model), MALS allo-cates a distinct sparsity level sl to each layer l by jointly considering inter-task conflict and layer im-portance. The allocation proceeds in three stages. 

Layerwise Conflict Scoring For each layer l

and each pair of tasks (i, j ), we measure conflict through two complementary signals. The first is the absolute Pearson correlation of the flattened weight updates: 

ρ(i,j ) 

> l

= (τ li − ¯τ li )⊤(τ lj − ¯τ lj )

∥τ li − ¯τ li ∥ · ∥ τ lj − ¯τ lj ∥ , (1) where τ li denotes the vectorized task vector for task 

i at layer l and ¯τ li its element-wise mean. High 

|ρ(i,j ) 

> l

| indicates that two tasks modify the same parameters in correlated (or anti-correlated) direc-tions, both of which can cause interference during merging. The second signal is the sign disagreement ratio, which captures the fraction of parameter positions 12 where two task vectors pull in opposite directions: 

d(i,j ) 

> l

= 2 · |{ k : sign( τ li,k ) · sign( τ lj,k ) < 0}| |{ k : τ li,k ̸ = 0 }| + |{ k : τ lj,k ̸ = 0 }| .

(2) We combine these two signals with equal weight and average over all  T

> 2

 task pairs to obtain a single conflict score per layer: 

cl = 1

 T

> 2

 X

> i<j

h 12 ρ(i,j ) 

> l

+ 12 d(i,j )

> l

i

. (3) 

Layer Importance To prevent over-pruning of layers that carry substantial task-specific infor-mation, we define a magnitude-based importance score as the mean absolute value of the task vector entries, averaged across tasks: 

ml = 1

T

> T

X

> i=1

mean 



|τ li |



. (4) Layers with larger fine-tuning updates are consid-ered more important and receive lower sparsity. 

Adaptive Allocation Both cl and ml are min-max normalized to [0 , 1] :

ˆcl = cl − min l′ cl′

max l′ cl′ − min l′ cl′

,

ˆml = ml − min l′ ml′

max l′ ml′ − min l′ ml′

.

(5) A raw allocation score for each layer trades off conflict reduction against importance preservation with hyperparameters α and β:

rl = α ˆcl − β ˆml. (6) A softmax transformation converts these scores into a non-negative distribution over layers: 

wl = exp( rl − max l′ rl′ )

P 

> l′

exp( rl′ − max l′ rl′ ) , (7) and the initial per-layer sparsity is obtained by linearly mapping wl into the allowed range 

[smin , s max ]:

s(0)  

> l

= smin + wl · (smax − smin ). (8) To enforce the global budget constraint 

> 1
> L

P 

> l

sl = starget , we apply an iterative projec-tion that alternates between an affine correction and box clipping. At each iteration, we compute a uniform shift δ = starget − 1

> L

P 

> l

sl and update 

sl ← clip( sl + δ, s min , s max ). When clipping sat-urates some layers at a bound, the residual budget is redistributed among the free (non-saturated) lay-ers F = {l : smin < s l < s max } via a scaled correction: 

δ′ = (starget − ¯s) · L

|F| ,sl ← clip( sl + δ′, s min , s max ), ∀ l ∈ F .

(9) This procedure converges when | 1

> L

P 

> l

sl −

starget | < ϵ , which in practice requires fewer than ten iterations. After allocation, each task vector is sparsified by retaining only the top-(1 − sl) fraction of en-tries by magnitude at each layer, yielding layerwise masks that concentrate surviving parameters in low-conflict, high-importance regions of the network. The sparsified task vectors then proceed to sign election and disjoint merging, producing the final merged model as θmerged = θpre + λ τ merged .

Experimental Setup For language model exper-iments, we use Mistral-7B (Jiang et al., 2023) as the base model and merge three fine-tuned variants: WizardMath-7B-V1.1 (math reasoning), OpenHermes-2.5-Mistral-7B (general reasoning), and zephyr-7b-beta (chat/QA). We evaluate on GSM8K, ARC-Easy, ARC-Challenge, HellaSwag, and perplexity (WikiText-2) with 200 samples per benchmark (randomly sampled). For vision exper-iments, we use ViT-B/16 pretrained on ImageNet and fine-tune four task-specific models on CIFAR-100 subsets (animals, vehicles, objects, nature), evaluating on the full CIFAR-100 test set. All ex-periments use 50% target sparsity. We compare MALS against several baselines: (1) Simple Averaging, which uniformly averages all task vectors; (2) Uniform Sparsity, which ap-plies identical magnitude-based pruning across all layers; and (3) TIES-Merging (Yadav et al., 2023), which combines trimming, sign election, and dis-joint merging. 

Results Table 4 presents our main results. A key finding is that sign election is domain-dependent :while TIES-Merging achieves the best vision ac-curacy (52.95%), it catastrophically fails on LLM reasoning tasks (12.5% ARC-Easy vs. 75.5% for MALS without sign election). We attribute this to the diversity of LLM fine-tuning objectives—math, reasoning, and chat tasks induce conflicting param-eter updates, causing TIES’s sign election to zero out critical weights. 13 Table 4: Model merging results on LLM (Mistral-7B) and Vision (ViT-B/16) tasks. Best results per column in bold .

↓ indicates lower is better. 

Method LLM (Mistral-7B) Vision (ViT-B/16) 

GSM8K ARC-E ARC-C HSwag PPL ↓ Acc. F1 Simple Average 0.530 0.430 0.290 0.620 13.06 0.473 0.453 Uniform Sparsity 0.480 0.750 0.605 0.605 12.21 0.425 0.399 TIES-Merging 0.545 0.125 0.090 0.655 14.57 0.530 0.515 

TIES (w/ sign) 0.545 0.455 0.310 0.630 12.97 – –

MALS (ours) 0.525 0.755 0.605 0.625 12.22 0.493 0.472 

MALS (w/ sign) 0.560 0.475 0.315 0.625 12.61 – –

Table 5: Accuracy of the proposed Strategy Search method on three reasoning benchmarks. textbfBold means the best performance.                

> Method GSM8K MATH BBH
> Direct 93.0 46.0 84.0 CoT 89.0 42.0 90.0 Self-Consistency 95.0 48.0 92.0
> Strategy Search (ours) 95.0 50.0 88.0

Table 6: Robustness of FAS under evaluation-pipeline variations (n=300). We vary retrieval depth ( k), embed-ding model, and judge model from the default setting (shaded). Rankings remain consistent (O URS > Un-tuned > CoI). Avg. Pearson ( r) and Spearman ( ρ) are instance-level correlations with the baseline.                                    

> kEmbed Judge OURS Untuned CoI rρ
> 10 3-large 4.1-mini 6.94 6.46 6.07 ––53-large 4.1-mini 6.93 6.46 6.05 0.946 0.931 10 3-small 4.1-mini 6.74 6.36 5.93 0.712 0.771 10 3-large 4o-mini 6.72 6.57 6.25 0.705 0.664

B FAS Robustness Validation 

To verify the robustness of our evaluation frame-work, we vary three components of FAS indepen-dently: retrieval depth, embedding model, and judge model. Starting from the default configura-tion ( k=10 , text-embedding-3-large , GPT-4.1-mini), we re-evaluate 300 randomly sampled test instances under each variant setting. As shown in Table 6, the model ordering remains consistent across all configurations (O URS > Un-tuned > CoI). Reducing retrieval depth from k=10 

to k=5 yields nearly identical absolute scores and very high instance-level correlation with the base-line (Avg. r=0 .946 , ρ=0 .931 ), indicating that the top candidates typically appear within the top-5 retrieval results. Using a smaller embedding model ( text-embedding-3-small ) lowers abso-lute scores but preserves relative comparisons (Avg. 

r=0 .712 , ρ=0 .771 ); we attribute the reduced corre-lation primarily to differences in similarity calibra-tion and the smaller embedding model being less sensitive to fine-grained semantic distinctions. Re-placing the judge with GPT-4o-mini similarly main-tains the same ordering (Avg. r=0 .705 , ρ=0 .664 ), consistent with weaker discrimination of subtle proposal–paper differences and modest shifts in score calibration. Overall, while absolute FAS values vary with embedding/judge capacity, the qualitative conclusions and model rankings remain stable under reasonable pipeline variations. 

C Qualitative Analysis 

To verify that higher evaluation scores corre-spond to genuine alignment with human research rather than superficial score inflation, we conduct two case studies comparing proposals from our stepwise-CoT model, the untuned baseline, and Chain-of-Ideas against human-derived proposals reconstructed from published papers. The results are shown in Table 7 and Table 8. 

Case 1: TypedThinker (LLM reasoning) The published paper proposes a framework with three tightly integrated components: a meta-thinker that predicts reasoning type effectiveness, an explicit demonstration memory for type-specific few-shot retrieval, and a fine-tuned reasoner with weighted voting across reasoning types. Our model gener-ates a proposal that captures the same core insight— explicit strategy selection and coordination across diverse reasoning types (deductive, inductive, ab-ductive, analogical)—and designs a concrete mech-anism for it (strategy biasing with modular oper-ations), receiving scores of 7/10 on both hypoth-14 esis and method. In contrast, the untuned model proposes a diffuse collection of loosely connected components—graph representations, multiagent de-bate, and world model integration—none of which appear in the published paper (method: 3/10). CoI similarly defaults to a generic “hybrid framework” with multi-agent debate, lacking the specific meta-thinker or demonstration memory design (method: 4/10). Notably, while all three models reproduce a similar research question (since it is provided in the input), the quality divergence emerges in how 

they propose to solve it: our model converges on a focused, multi-component architecture that mirrors the human design, whereas the baselines resort to enumerating popular techniques without a coherent design rationale. 

Case 2: Retrieval Head (long-context factuality) 

The published paper identifies sparse, special-ized attention heads—termed “retrieval heads”— that perform copy-paste retrieval from long con-texts, validated through Needle-in-a-Haystack tests across multiple model families. Our model pro-poses “Long-Context Retrieval Heads,” nearly matching the published title, and correctly hypothe-sizes that a subset of attention heads act as retrieval mechanisms that are causally responsible for factu-ality (hypothesis: 9/10). It further proposes a con-crete identification method via PCA-based analysis and causal validation through ablation (method: 7/10). The published paper was even retrieved as the most similar paper in the embedding-based evaluation, confirming semantic alignment beyond surface-level wording. The untuned baseline, while identifying the correct general direction, dilutes its proposal across three loosely connected tracks— mechanistic analysis, chain-of-thought evaluation, and KV cache compression—without converging on the focused retrieval head mechanism (method: 5/10). CoI frames the problem around “induction heads” rather than the more precise “retrieval heads” concept and proposes modifying attention architec-tures, diverging from the interpretability-focused approach of the actual paper (method: 5/10). These case studies illustrate a consistent pat-tern: our stepwise reasoning procedure enables the model to synthesize insights from the input litera-ture into a focused, methodologically specific pro-posal that closely mirrors what human researchers ultimately published, whereas the baselines tend to produce generic frameworks that enumerate pop-ular techniques without a coherent research narra-tive. 

D Implementation Details 

D.1 Baselines AI-Reseacher : For controlled comparison, we re-move the retrieval stage and provide the same in-spiring papers to all methods. The model first gen-erates a structured seed idea (problem, motivation, method, and experiment plan), which is then ex-panded into a proposal and formatted into our eval-uation structure. 

Chain-of-Ideas : In our setting, we treat the pro-vided inspiring papers as the idea chain and prompt the model to analyze their evolution and generate a proposal aligned with the predicted research di-rection. The generated output is then formatted to match our proposal structure. 

D.2 Prompt for Proposal Generation 

We use different prompt variants to implement prompting-only, direct-CoT, and stepwise-CoT baselines under different input conditions. The sys-tem prompts are provided in Figure 5. Additional user-side instructions used for CoT-based proposal generation are provided in Figure 6. 

D.3 Training Details 

We fine-tune LLMs using parameter-efficient LoRA under the accelerate framework mainly on 4 H100 GPUs (94G). The hyperparameters are provided in Table 9. 

D.4 Data Details Structured Proposal Representation Each pro-posal ˆP is generated in a pre-defined structured for-mat to ensure consistency and enable fine-grained evaluation. The structure includes: • Research Question : the main research ques-tion(s). • Hypothesis : a concise statement of the core hypothesis. • Proposed Method : a detailed description of the methodology, algorithm, or approach, in-cluding key components and technical steps. • Novelty Claims : explicit statements describ-ing intended contributions or innovations. • Experimental Details : description of the ex-periments, including datasets, baselines, eval-uation metrics, and validation protocols. 15 To get the structured proposal, we first crawl the full papers in PDF format from OpenReview and extract the first 10 pages (since published papers on OpenReview has no more than 10 pages in main text). We then use GPT-4.1 to convert the papers into structured proposals with the prompt provided in Figure 7. 

Inspiring Papers Selection For each target pa-per, we retrieve all papers cited by the target paper via the Semantic Scholar API, then apply a two-stage filtering and selection process. In the first stage, candidates are pre-filtered and ranked using a recency-weighted scoring function: papers pub-lished within two years of the target receive a full boost of 100 points, with a linear decay for papers up to five years older; papers exceeding this win-dow receive zero recency score. A minor citation-count tiebreaker ( min(log(1 + c) × 2, 20) points, where c is the citation count) is added, and refer-ences with fewer than five citations are excluded. The top 15 candidates by this score are retained. In the second stage, an LLM (GPT-5-mini) analyzes the target paper’s title and abstract alongside the 15 candidate references and selects the five that provided the most specific and direct intellectual influence on the target’s unique contributions. The LLM is instructed to avoid well-known founda-tional works (e.g., Transformers, BERT, ResNet) and instead prefer papers that share niche method-ological choices, specific problem formulations, or particular technical innovations that the target di-rectly extends. Full prompt is provided in Figure 8. 

Reasoning Trace Synthesis We use GPT-5 (Ope-nAI, 2025b) to synthesize the reasoning traces in the training data. The prompt for CoT SFT is pro-vided in Figure 9, and the prompt for Stepwise CoT SFT is provided in Figure 10. 

Statistics of Proposals Table 10 summarizes the statistics of our datasets. For training, we collect 2,823 examples from papers accepted at NeurIPS 2024 and ICLR 2024. Each example pairs a prompt—comprising 5 structured inspiring pa-pers and a research question (mean: 1,755 words)— with a completion containing the target proposal. Three completion variants are generated: stepwise-CoT (909 words, including three explicit reasoning steps), CoT with gap analysis (900 words), and direct proposal without reasoning (460 words). For evaluation, we construct a test set of 819 exam-ples from papers at NeurIPS 2025, ICML 2025, and ICLR 2025, ensuring no temporal overlap with training data. 

Dataset Statistics. Table 10 summarizes the statistics of our datasets. For training, we collect 2,823 examples from papers accepted at NeurIPS 2024 (4,035 papers) and ICLR 2024 (2,261 pa-pers). Each example pairs a prompt—comprising 5 structured inspiring papers and an optional research question (mean: 1,755 words)—with a completion containing the target proposal. Three completion variants are generated: stepwise-CoT (909 words, including three explicit reasoning steps), CoT with gap analysis (900 words), and direct proposal with-out reasoning (460 words). For evaluation, we construct a test set of 819 examples from papers at NeurIPS 2025 (5,275 papers), ICML 2025 (3,260 papers), and ICLR 2025 (3,708 papers), ensur-ing no temporal overlap with training data. Test prompts are shorter on average (1,057 words) as they include only the structured inspiring papers and research question without system instructions. 

D.5 Human Evaluation Data Selection We sample 60 data points from the 35% quality-filtered subset of our 819-example test set, stratified by research area: 42 NLP papers and 18 multimodal/vision papers (approximately 70/30). For each data point, we construct two com-parison pairs—Stepwise CoT vs. human-derived proposal and Stepwise CoT vs. prompting-only (un-tuned Qwen2.5-14B)—yielding 120 pairs in total. Both sides of each pair are required to contain all five structured sections (Research Question, Hy-pothesis, Proposed Method, Novelty Claims, Ex-periment Details); pairs missing any section are excluded. Reasoning traces are stripped from Step-wise CoT outputs before display so that annotators see only the final proposal. 

Annotation Interface We build a web-based side-by-side comparison tool that presents each pair as “Proposal A” and “Proposal B.” We pro-vide a screenshot of the annotation interface in Fig-ure 11. To prevent positional bias, the assignment of the two proposals to sides A and B is random-ized independently for each pair (with a fixed seed for reproducibility). Annotators are not told which side is model-generated, human-derived, or from which model variant. For each pair, annotators se-lect one of three options— A is Better , Tie , or B is Better —along each of three dimensions: 16 • Soundness : Which proposal is more techni-cally sound and internally consistent? • Excitement : Which proposal is more exciting or promising as a publishable research direc-tion? • Overall : If you could only advance one to a serious research project, which would you choose? 

Annotators and Batching The 120 pairs are di-vided into four batches of 30 pairs each (15 per comparison type), and each batch is independently annotated by three domain-expert graduate students with prior conference reviewing experience. A to-tal of 11 unique annotators participate across the four batches; no annotator sees the same pair twice. 

Aggregation. For each pair and dimension, we take the majority vote among the three annotators as the final judgment. When no category receives a strict majority (e.g., one vote each for A, B, and Tie), we treat the outcome as a tie. Win rates are computed by crediting full wins as 1 and ties as 0.5; 95% confidence intervals are obtained via the Wil-son score method. 

Detailed Results Table 11 reports the full win/tie/loss counts, win rates with 95% confidence intervals, and the percentage of pairs where all three annotators agree (unanimity). Against human-derived proposals, Stepwise CoT achieves near-parity across all dimensions, with win rates close to 50% and wide confidence intervals reflecting the difficulty of the comparison. The low unanim-ity (6.7–11.7%) confirms that differences between strong model-generated and human-derived pro-posals are often subtle. Against prompting-only proposals, Stepwise CoT is preferred more consis-tently, with higher unanimity (26.7–31.7%) indicat-ing clearer quality differences. 

D.6 LLM Semantic Judge for FAS 

We use GPT-4.1-mini with a temperature of 0.1 to score the semantic similarity between a gener-ated proposal and a candidate future paper. The score scale is 1-10. The full prompt is provided in Figure 12. 

D.7 Multi-dimension LLM Judge 

We use GPT-4.1-mini with temperature 0 to eval-uate proposal quality along three dimensions: re-source validity, task–method consistency, and task– experiment consistency. The full prompt is pro-vided in Figure 13. 17 Table 7: Case Study 1— TypedThinker: Typed Thinking Improves Large Language Model Reasoning . The human-derived proposal designs a meta-thinker that selects among reasoning types with demonstration memory and weighted voting. Our model captures this core design, while the baselines propose generic frameworks with unrelated components. 

Dim. Model Human-Derived Reference Generated Proposal 

> Hypothesis

OURS  

> (7/10)

Incorporating explicit selection and demonstration of diverse reasoning types (deductive, inductive, abductive, analogical) for each problem instance will enable LLMs to solve a broader range of problems more effectively than approaches relying on a single or undifferentiated reasoning strategy. 

Explicitly biasing and coordinating the use of high-level reasoning strategies within LLMs, particularly by introducing strategy biasing and modular reasoning operations , will significantly enhance their performance on complex logical and mathematical tasks compared to standard prompting methods. Untuned  

> (4/10)

Integrating diverse reasoning strategies within a unified framework will significantly enhance the problem-solving capabilities of large language models, particularly in complex logical and mathematical tasks, compared to models relying solely on deductive reasoning. CoI  

> (4/10)

By integrating a Hybrid Reasoning Framework that includes abductive, inductive, deductive, and analogical reasoning modalities, along with 

dynamic strategy selection and enhanced interactive mechanisms ,LLMs can significantly enhance their problem-solving capabilities, par-ticularly in tasks involving incomplete data, pattern recognition, and prediction. 

> Method

OURS  

> (7/10)

Three main components: (1) a 

meta-thinker , fine-tuned to predict the effectiveness of each reasoning type based on empirical success rates; (2) an 

explicit demonstration collection , storing successful solutions for each type, enabling retrieval of relevant few-shot examples ; (3) a 

reasoner applying the selected type, guided by retrieved demonstrations. The system aggregates answers via 

weighted voting .Two key components: Strategy Biasing —explicitly biases the LLM toward specific strategies (inductive, abductive, analogical) by condi-tioning the prompt on the desired strategy; Modular Reasoning Op-erations —task-adaptive reasoning functions that can be flexibly com-bined and executed in parallel. A Strategy Coordination mechanism schedules and combines the outputs of different reasoning strategies to optimize task performance, leveraging the strengths of each strategy for a given problem. Untuned  

> (3/10)

Reasoning Strategy Module : dynamically switch between abductive, inductive, and analogical reasoning . . . Graph Representation : graph-based structure where nodes represent reasoning steps and edges rep-resent dependencies. Multiagent Debate : multiple LLM instances generate and critique reasoning paths using different strategies. World Model Integration : incorporate a world model to simulate state transi-tions and integrate planning algorithms to guide the reasoning process. CoI  

> (4/10)

Three core components: Integrated Reasoning Modalities, Dynamic Strategy Selection, and Enhanced Interactive Mechanisms. Each rea-soning type is a distinct module, designed to operate independently yet collaboratively. A decision-making layer evaluates task requirements and selects the most suitable strategy. Leveraging the multiagent de-bate framework , the method facilitates collaboration among multiple model instances, refining and validating reasoning outcomes through iterative feedback. 

> Experiment

OURS  

> (6/10)

Open-source LLMs ( Mistral 7B, LLaMA3 8B, Qwen2-7B )on logical reasoning ( LogiQA, BBH ) and math ( GSM8K, MATH ). Baselines: few-shot prompting, CoT selection, self-discover, mixture-of-reasoning. Generalization to unseen domains; transferability to GPT-4o. Ablation studies on each component. Benchmarks including GSM8K, AIME, MATH , HumanEval-Analogies, AIME-Logic, and MATH-Logic. Exact-match accuracy with analysis of task-specific correctness and robustness to prompt im-perfections. Baselines: standard CoT, CoT with Self-Consistency, GoT, and Debate. Ablation studies for Strategy Biasing, Modular Reasoning Operations, and Strategy Coordination. Efficiency and robustness to model scale evaluated. Untuned  

> (4/10)

Collect tasks from benchmarks like BIG-Bench Hard . Train LLM us-ing standard pre-training and fine-tuning. Test on curated tasks. Metrics: accuracy, consistency, and creativity. Compare performance with and without the proposed framework. Identify tasks where the model shows emergent reasoning capabilities. CoI  

> (3/10)

Datasets: BIG-Bench Suite, MATH, Winogrande, COPA. Baselines: standard LLMs, self-consistency, graph-based reasoning, multi-agent debate, world model integrated models. Metrics: accuracy, latency, consistency, adaptability score. Fine-tuning on respective datasets, deploying on test sets, and conducting qualitative analysis. 

18 Table 8: Case Study 2— Retrieval Head Mechanistically Explains Long-Context Factuality . The human-derived proposal identifies sparse “retrieval heads” responsible for copy-paste retrieval, validated via Needle-in-a-Haystack tests. Our model nearly matches this design, correctly naming the concept and proposing causal ablation. The baselines dilute across loosely connected tracks (Untuned) or misidentify the mechanism as “induction heads” (CoI). 

Dim. Model Human-Derived Reference Generated Proposal 

> Hypothesis

OURS  

> (9/10)

A small, specialized subset of attention heads, termed 

retrieval heads , are primarily responsible for retrieval from long contexts. These are 

universal, sparse, intrinsic to pretrained models, dynamically activated, and causally linked 

to factuality and complex reasoning. A subset of attention heads in long-context LLMs act as retrieval heads ,selectively copying and retrieving information from arbitrary positions in the input sequence, which is causally responsible for improved factuality and reasoning performance. Untuned  

> (6/10)

Specific attention head circuits in LLMs are responsible for long-context retrieval, and these mechanisms significantly enhance the model’s factu-ality and reasoning abilities in downstream tasks. CoI  

> (6/10)

It is hypothesized that induction heads significantly contribute to long-context retrieval through specific interaction patterns with other attention heads, thereby enhancing the model’s ability to maintain and leverage long-term dependencies. Furthermore . . . novel prompting strategies and architectural designs can improve long-context retrieval and reason-ing. 

> Method

OURS  

> (7/10)

Define a retrieval score for each attention head, quantifying 

copy-paste behavior during autoregressive decoding. 

Needle-in-a-Haystack tests with unique QA pairs embedded at random positions . . . Retrieval scores computed across diverse contexts and model variants. Examine 

universality, sparsity, intrinsic nature , and dynamic activation across model families, scales, and fine-tuning types. Identify and characterize retrieval heads —attention heads that selec-tively copy and retrieve from arbitrary positions. Cluster heads based on copying behavior using PCA of per-token loss vectors ; retrieval heads identified as those exhibiting long-range copying across multi-ple training snapshots. Causal role validated through ablation studies ,where retrieval heads are removed or replaced and impact on retrieval and downstream reasoning is measured. Retention patterns in the KV cache analyzed for memory usage and efficiency. Untuned  

> (5/10)

Three separate tracks: (1) Mechanistic Analysis —per-token loss PCA, identify attention heads via sequence copying tasks, architectural per-turbations and direct ablations; (2) Chain-of-Thought Prompting —evaluate reasoning with and without identified retrieval heads, com-pare to standard prompting; (3) KV Cache Compression —adaptive techniques (e.g., FastGen), use retrieval heads to inform compression policies, ensure critical context retained. CoI  

> (5/10)

Multi-faceted approach: mechanistic analysis of attention mechanisms, focusing on induction heads and their interactions . . . New prompting strategies based on chain-of-thought prompting to encourage engage-ment with long-range dependencies. Architectural designs to prioritize long-term context, including modifications to the attention mechanism and novel training objectives. 

> Experiment

OURS  

> (6/10)

LLMs including Llama-2, Yi, Qwen, Mistral, Mixtral , scales 6B–34B, regimes: base, chat, MoE, SFT, RLHF. Primary: 

Needle-in-a-Haystack with 

∼600 instances per model, context 1K–50K tokens. Downstream: extractive QA, CoT reasoning ( MMLU, MuSiQue, GSM8K ). Masking 

retrieval vs. random heads. Suite of long-context LLMs with and without attention sinks. Primary: long-context retrieval tasks prompting models to retrieve from arbitrary positions in long sequences. Downstream: mathematical reasoning (GSM8K, AIME, MATH ). Metrics: retrieval accuracy (top-k), rea-soning accuracy/F1, factuality scores. Ablation studies systematically remove or replace retrieval heads to quantify causal impact. Synthetic datasets with long-range dependencies validate copying behavior. Untuned  

> (5/10)

Train multiple LLMs ( GPT-3, T5, BERT ) with varying architectures. Per-token loss PCA to identify retrieval heads. Chain-of-thought prompts for reasoning tasks (arithmetic, commonsense, symbolic). Adaptive KV cache compression (FastGen). Metrics: accuracy, F1, perplexity. Compare to fixed-policy baselines to demonstrate effective-ness. CoI  

> (5/10)

Benchmarks: GLUE, SuperGLUE, Long Range Arena , supplemented by custom longer-context datasets. Baselines: BERT, RoBERTa, T5, with induction heads and adaptive KV cache compression. Metrics: factuality, coherence, downstream performance, memory efficiency. Cross-validation and ablation studies to validate findings. 

19 System Prompts for Proposal Generation Standard Generation Prompt 

You are an expert AI research scientist. Given inspiring research papers and a target research question, propose a novel research idea that addresses the question. Your response should include: - A proposed research idea with title, research question, hypothesis, proposed method, novelty claims, and experiment details Format your response starting with "## Proposed Research". 

Research-Question-Only Prompt 

You are an expert AI research scientist. Given a research question, propose a novel research idea that addresses the question. Your response should include: - A proposed research idea with title, hypothesis, proposed method, novelty claims, and experiment details Format your response starting with "## Proposed Research". 

Inspiring-Papers-Only Prompt 

You are an expert AI research scientist. Given a set of inspiring research papers, identify gaps and opportunities, then propose a novel research idea that builds upon their contributions. Your response should include: - A proposed research idea with title, research question, hypothesis, proposed method, novelty claims, and experiment details Format your response starting with "## Proposed Research". 

Direct CoT Prompt 

You are an expert AI research scientist. Given inspiring research papers and a target research question, first reason about gaps and opportunities, then propose a novel research idea. Your response should include: 1. A reasoning section analyzing gaps, borrowing inspiration, and synthesizing ideas 2. A proposed research idea with title, research question, hypothesis, proposed method, novelty claims, and experiment details Format the reasoning with "### Gap Analysis", "### Inspiration Borrowing", "### Synthesis" sections, then the proposal starting with "## Proposed Research". 

Stepwise CoT Prompt 

You are an expert AI research scientist. Given inspiring research papers and a target research question, develop a novel research idea step by step. Your response should follow this exact structure: 1. Problem Identification reasoning (analyze gaps and inspiration) 2. Research Question + Hypothesis 3. Method Design reasoning (how to approach the problem) 4. Proposed Method + Novelty Claims 5. Experiment Design reasoning (how to validate) 6. Experiment Details Use "### Step 1: Problem Identification", "### Step 2: Method Design Reasoning", "### Step 3: Experiment Design Reasoning" for reasoning sections, and "## Proposed Research" before the proposal sections. 

Figure 5: System prompts used for different proposal-generation variants. 

20 Additional Instructions for CoT Variants Direct CoT Instruction 

Based on these inspiring papers, first analyze the research landscape, then propose a novel research idea. Start by identifying gaps in the existing work, what ideas to borrow, and how to synthesize them. Then propose your research idea. 

Stepwise CoT Instruction 

Based on these inspiring papers, propose a novel research idea step by step. First, analyze the gaps and identify what ideas to borrow from the inspiring papers. Then, formulate the research question and hypothesis. Next, reason about the method design, and propose the method with its novelty claims. Finally, reason about how to validate the method, and describe the experiment details. Generate each section in this order: 1. reasoning 2. Research Question + Hypothesis 3. reasoning 4. Proposed Method + Novelty Claims 5. reasoning 6. Experiment Details 

Figure 6: Additional user-side instructions used for CoT-based proposal generation. 

21 Prompt for Proposal Target Synthesis 

You are an expert research paper analyzer. Your task is to extract structured information from research papers and rewrite it as a research proposal , rather than as a summary of an existing paper. Extract the following information and return it in valid JSON format: 

{"research_question": "The main research question(s). It should be broad and does not leak any key ideas.", "hypothesis": "The hypothesis or hypotheses (if any, otherwise 'Not specified ')", "proposed_method": "A detailed description of the methodology, approach, algorithm, or method. Include key components, steps, and technical details. This should be 3-5 sentences minimum.", "experiment_details": "Description of the experiments, including datasets used, baselines compared, evaluation metrics, and key experimental setup details. This should be 2-4 sentences minimum.", "novelty_claims": "Claims about novelty, contributions, or innovations" }

Critical Writing Style Guidelines: 

• Write as a research proposal , not as a summary of an existing paper. • Never use phrases such as “The authors propose. . . ”, “This paper introduces. . . ”, “The paper presents. . . ”, “They develop. . . ”, or “The authors show. . . ”. • Never reference the paper as an external work (e.g., “this paper”, “the authors”, “they”, or “the work”). • Instead, write in proposal style: describe what is proposed , what will be done , or use passive voice. • Good: “The proposed method introduces a novel framework. . . ” or “A new approach is developed that. . . ” • Good: “The method achieves state-of-the-art results. . . ” or “Experiments demonstrate that. . . ” • Bad: “The authors introduce ROBUSTALPACAEVAL. . . ” or “This paper proposes a new benchmark. . . ” • Be detailed and comprehensive, especially for proposed_method and experiment_details .• If a field is not explicitly stated, infer from context when reasonable. • If information is truly not available, use “Not specified”. First give your reasoning process, then return the JSON response. The JSON response should be: 

{"research_question": "...", "hypothesis": "...", "proposed_method": "...", "experiment_details": "...", "novelty_claims": "..." }

Figure 7: Prompt used to convert a paper into a structured proposal target for supervision. 

22 Prompt for Inspiring Paper Selection 

You are an expert at analyzing academic paper citations to identify specific and direct intellectual influence. Given a paper and its references, identify which reference(s) provided the most specific and direct inspiration for the paper’s unique contributions. 

Current Paper 

Title: {current_title} Abstract: {current_abstract} 

Candidate References (papers cited by the current paper) 

{candidates_text} 

Task 

Select the {num_to_select} reference(s) that directly and specifically inspired the current paper’s unique contributions. 

Important Guidelines: 

• Avoid selecting well-known foundational papers (e.g., Transformers, BERT, GPT, ResNet, U-Net, Chain-of-Thought) unless the current paper makes a very specific extension of that exact work. • Prefer selecting papers that introduced the specific technique, formulation, or approach that the current paper directly builds upon. • Look for papers that share niche methodological choices, specific problem formulations, or particular technical innovations. • The best inspirations are papers where one can point to a concrete technique or idea that was directly adopted or extended. For each selection, provide: 1. the reference number selected, 2. the type of inspiration ( specific_technique , direct_extension , niche_methodology , problem_variant ,

algorithmic_basis ), 3. the specific ideas or techniques the current paper borrowed, 4. a confidence score (0.0–1.0), where higher confidence indicates a more specific and direct connection, 5. detailed reasoning explaining the specific intellectual connection. 

Output Format (JSON) 

{"selections": [ {"reference_number": 1, "inspiration_type": "specific_technique", "key_ideas_borrowed": ["specific technique X", "particular formulation Y"], "confidence": 0.85, "reasoning": "The current paper 's [specific contribution] directly extends reference 1 's[specific technique]..." }]}

Respond with only valid JSON and no additional text. 

Figure 8: Prompt used to identify the most directly inspiring citations for each target paper. 

23 Prompt for Direct CoT Synthesis 

You are an expert research scientist. Given a set of inspiring papers and a target paper, generate a reasoning process that explains how these papers could lead to new research. 

Inspiring Papers (Direct Citations): 

{inspiring_papers} 

Target Paper (Research Outcome): 

Title: {target_title} Research Question: {target_research_question} Hypothesis: {target_hypothesis} Proposed Method: {target_proposed_method} Novelty Claims: {target_novelty_claims} 

Task: 

Generate a structured reasoning process with exactly three sections. Write as if you are a researcher developing ideas before 

creating the target paper, and do not leak the target paper’s specific solutions. 

Required Format (use these exact headers): Gap Analysis 

Identify 2–4 specific gaps or limitations in the inspiring papers: • Gap 1: [specific limitation] • Gap 2: [what is missing] • . . . 

Inspiration Borrowing 

State what techniques or ideas to borrow from which papers: • From [Paper Title]: [specific technique or idea to adapt] • From [Paper Title]: [framework or method to build on] • . . . 

Synthesis 

Explain how to combine the borrowed ideas to address the gaps (100–150 words), including: • the integration approach, • key modifications needed, • why this combination addresses the identified gaps. 

Important: 

• Total length: 300–500 words • Be specific about paper names when borrowing ideas • Do not mention “the target paper” or leak its solutions 

Figure 9: Prompt used to synthesize direct chain-of-thought reasoning traces from inspiring papers and a target paper outcome. 

24 Prompt for Stepwise CoT Synthesis 

You are an expert research scientist. Given a set of inspiring papers and a target paper, generate a step-by-step reasoning process that shows how a researcher would develop this research idea incrementally. 

Inspiring Papers (Direct Citations): 

{inspiring_papers} 

Target Paper (the final research output): 

Title: {target_title} Research Question: {target_research_question} Hypothesis: {target_hypothesis} Proposed Method: {target_proposed_method} Novelty Claims: {target_novelty_claims} Experiment Details: {target_experiment_details} 

Task: 

Generate intermediate reasoning that bridges between proposal sections. You will produce exactly three short reasoning blocks. The final output will be interleaved as: [Reasoning 1] → Research Question + Hypothesis → [Reasoning 2] → Proposed Method + Novelty Claims → [Reasoning 3] → Experiment Details Write each reasoning block as described below. 

Required Format (use these exact headers): Step 1: Problem Identification 

Analyze the inspiring papers to identify gaps and formulate the research direction (150–250 words): • what gaps or limitations exist in the inspiring papers, • what techniques or ideas could be borrowed, • how combining them suggests a specific research question. 

Step 2: Method Design Reasoning 

Given the research question and hypothesis, reason about how to design the method (80–120 words): • what approach would address the research question, • which techniques from the inspiring papers to adapt, • what makes this combination novel. 

Step 3: Experiment Design Reasoning 

Given the proposed method, reason about how to validate it (60–100 words): • what datasets or benchmarks are appropriate, • what baselines to compare against, • what metrics would demonstrate the method’s effectiveness. 

Important: 

• Do not copy the target paper’s sections verbatim into the reasoning. • Write as forward-looking reasoning, as if you have not seen the final answer yet. • Do not mention “the target paper”; write as your own thought process. • Each step should naturally lead to the next proposal section. 

Figure 10: Prompt used to synthesize stepwise chain-of-thought reasoning traces interleaved with proposal construc-tion. 

25 Figure 11: The annotation interface of the human evaluation. 

26 Prompt for Future-Alignment Scoring 

You are an expert research paper evaluator. Your task is to score the semantic similarity between a generated research proposal and an existing paper, both overall and for specific subfields. 

Generated Proposal: 

{proposal} 

Candidate Paper: 

{candidate_summary} 

Task: 

Rate the similarity on a scale of 0–10 for each subfield and overall: • 0: Completely unrelated • 3: Same broad area but different specific focus • 5: Related with some overlapping ideas • 7: Very similar direction • 10: Nearly identical Score each subfield: 1. research_question : How similar are the core research questions or problems being addressed? 2. hypothesis : How similar are the hypotheses or expected outcomes? 3. proposed_method : How similar are the proposed methodologies or techniques? 4. novelty_claims : How similar are the claimed contributions and novelty? 5. experiment_details : How similar are the experimental setups, datasets, or evaluation approaches? 6. overall : The holistic similarity considering all aspects Respond with only a JSON object: 

{"research_question": <0-10>, "hypothesis": <0-10>, "proposed_method": <0-10>, "novelty_claims": <0-10>, "experiment_details": <0-10>, "overall": <0-10>, "reasoning": "<brief explanation>" }

Figure 12: Prompt used for LLM-based future-alignment scoring between a generated proposal and a candidate future paper. 

27 Prompt for Proposal Quality Evaluation 

You are a critical expert reviewer evaluating a research proposal. Be strict and skeptical. Score on 3 dimensions (1–5 scale). 

Research Proposal: 

{proposal} 

Evaluation Dimensions (be critical; average proposals should score 3): 

1. Resource Validity (1–5): Are the mentioned datasets, benchmarks, baseline models, and tools real and correctly named? • 5: All resources are verified as real, correctly named, and appropriate for the task • 4: Most resources appear real, with at most minor naming issues or obscure references • 3: A mix of clearly real resources and some that are generic, vague, or difficult to verify • 2: Several resources appear fabricated, incorrectly named, or nonexistent • 1: Most resources are clearly hallucinated or incorrectly described 

Red flags: generic dataset names without specifics, made-up benchmark names, or nonexistent baseline models. 2. Task–Method Consistency (1–5): Does the method actually solve the stated problem? Is there logical coherence? • 5: The method directly addresses every aspect of the research question with a clear logical connection • 4: The method addresses the main task but may have minor logical gaps • 3: The method partially addresses the task, with some disconnected or tangential components • 2: Weak connection between method and stated task, or the method solves a different problem • 1: The method does not logically address the stated task 

Red flags: method components that do not connect to the hypothesis, or solving a different problem than stated. 3. Task–Experiment Consistency (1–5): Do the experiments actually validate the claims? Are the metrics appropriate? • 5: The experiments are perfectly designed to test the hypothesis with appropriate metrics • 4: The experiments are mostly appropriate, with only minor gaps in validation coverage • 3: Some experiments do not match the task type, or some metrics are only partially appropriate • 2: Significant mismatch; the experiments test different things than claimed • 1: The experiments are completely inappropriate for the stated task 

Red flags: wrong metrics for the task type, missing key experiments, or baselines from the wrong domain. 

Important: Be critical. Most proposals have flaws. A score of 5 should be rare. Average proposals should score around 3. Respond with only a JSON object: 

{"resource_validity": {"score": 1-5, "justification": "specific issues found or why it 's good"}, "task_method_consistency": {"score": 1-5, "justification": "specific logical gaps or strengths"}, "task_experiment_consistency": {"score": 1-5, "justification": "specific mismatches or why appropriate"} }

Figure 13: Prompt used for LLM-based proposal quality evaluation. 

28 Table 9: SFT training configuration for all the fine-tuning. Effective batch size equals batch size × gradient accumulation steps. 

Setting Value 

Epochs 2Max sequence length 8000 Batch size (per device) 1Gradient accumulation 4Effective batch size 4Learning rate 2 × 10 −5

Precision bf16 LoRA rank r 16 LoRA α 32 

Table 10: Mean proposal length in words. For training completions, we report both the full output (including reasoning) and the proposal-only portion. For generated proposals, we report the proposal after stripping reason-ing steps. 

Split Raw Proposal 

Training completions (NeurIPS’24 + ICLR’24) 

Stepwise-CoT 909 460 CoT 900 460 No-CoT 460 460 

Test reference (NeurIPS’25 + ICML’25 + ICLR’25) 

Human-derived proposal — 460 

Generated proposals 

Qwen-14B stepwise-CoT 888 438 Qwen-14B CoT 484 481 Qwen-14B no-CoT 449 446 Qwen-14B untuned 513 510 Qwen-7B stepwise-CoT 892 436 Llama-8B stepwise-CoT 932 366 CoI (Qwen-14B) 342 339 AI-Researcher (Qwen-14B) 351 348 

Table 11: Detailed human evaluation results. Win/Tie/Loss counts reflect the majority vote across three annotators per pair. Win rate treats ties as 0.5 wins. CI: Wilson score 95% confidence interval. Unanimity: percentage of pairs where all three annotators agree.                                     

> Comparison Dimension Win Tie Loss Win Rate (95% CI) Unanimity
> Stepwise CoT vs. Human Overall 25 10 25 50.0% [37.7, 62.3] 11.7% Soundness 21 11 28 44.2% [32.3, 56.7] 11.7% Excitement 20 18 22 48.3% [36.2, 60.7] 6.7% Stepwise CoT vs. Prompting Overall 31 326 54.2% [41.7, 66.1] 26.7% Soundness 29 724 54.2% [41.7, 66.1] 31.7% Excitement 30 10 20 58.3% [45.7, 69.9] 26.7%

29