Title: Causal Interventions Reveal Typologically Organized Syntactic Mechanisms in Multilingual Language Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.28924

Published Time: Tue, 01 Sep 2026 00:24:05 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
## Causal Interventions Reveal Typologically Organized Syntactic Mechanisms in Multilingual Language Models 

Sasha Boguraev 1 Toshiki Nakai 2, ∗ Kyle Mahowald 1 Julius Steuer 3

> 1

The University of Texas at Austin 2Leipzig University, ScaDS.AI Dresden/Leipzig 

> 3

Heidelberg Institute for Theoretical Studies 

{sasha.boguraev, kyle}@utexas.edu toshiki.nakai@uni-leipzig.de julius.steuer@h-its.org 

Abstract 

Linguistic theory has long recognized cross-linguistic syntactic regularities, leading to claims that these similar structures are pro-cessed by similar mechanisms. However, this hypothesis has been difficult to test empir-ically due to our lack of fine-grained, ma-nipulable access of human processing mech-anisms. In this work, we take advantage of techniques from mechanistic interpretabil-ity to study such a question in multilingual LMs. We first isolate language-internal mecha-nisms before attempting to transfer them cross-lingually. Across four models and three well-studied constructions (subject–verb number agreement, anaphoric pronoun gender agree-ment, and filler–gap object extraction) we find consistent cross-lingual mechanism transfer. We further find transfer to be graded, with more transfer between more typologically sim-ilar languages. We believe our work provides novel hypotheses about cross-linguistic syntac-tic structures and multilingual processing, and more broadly shows how the study of language models can help inform linguistic theory. 

1 Introduction 

Linguistics has long accepted there are shared abstract syntactic structures across different lan-guages — perhaps due to innate constraints (Chom-sky, 1965) or functional evolutionary pressures (Greenberg et al., 1963; Comrie, 1989). It has often been hypothesized that these similar struc-tures across different languages recruit similar ma-chinery in human processing (Hartsuiker et al., 2004; Hawkins, 2014; Norcliffe et al., 2015; Malik-Moraleda et al., 2022). However, testing for such shared mechanisms in humans is difficult due to a lack of granular manipulable access needed to ask whether processing of two languages recruit the same internal mechanism. 

> ∗Work initiated while author was at Saarland University.

Figure 1: We localize LM’s syntactic mechanisms to language-internal subspaces. We then test such mech-anism’s effects on other languages. If the intervention is still efficacious, this indicates the model’s syntactic mechanisms are language-agnostic. This provides evi-dence of cross-lingual shared mechanisms .

In recent years, neural Language Models (LMs) have shown remarkable syntactic competence — possessing an ability to produce and process ut-terances previously thought to require abstract linguistic representations, both mono- and cross-lingually (Linzen et al., 2016; Wilcox et al., 2018; Manning et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2020; Warstadt et al., 2020; Jumelet et al., 2026). This compe-tence, combined with privileged access to their in-ternal computations has led to a host of work treat-ing them as model organisms to formulate and test linguistic hypotheses (Linzen and Baroni, 2021; Warstadt and Bowman, 2022; Wilcox et al., 2024; Boguraev et al., 2025; Boguraev and Mahowald, 2026; Misra and Kim, 2026). 1arXiv:2608.28924v1 [cs.CL] 28 Aug 2026 In this work, we take advantage of advances in mechanistic interpretability, particularly Causal Abstraction (Geiger et al., 2025), to understand the internal organization of high-level linguistic ab-stractions in multilingual LMs. The basic idea of the Causal Abstraction framework is to identify in-ternal structure in the neural model that controls downstream behavior: for our purposes, syntac-tic behavior (Arora et al., 2024; Boguraev et al., 2025). Our goal here is to identify causally rele-vant linguistic structures in one language and then test whether intervening on that same structure in 

another language has a similar effect (Figure 1). If so, we would take that to be evidence for shared mechanisms across languages—offering potential insights into the underlying similarity of structures across languages, as well as into how multilingual neural models organize syntactic information. In particular, we test for shared mechanisms across three structurally varied phenomena: subject–verb number agreement, anaphoric pronoun gender agreement, and filler–gap ob-ject extraction. Across fifteen languages and four LMs spanning sizes, families, and training specs, we find LMs recruit shared, repurposed mechanisms for each phenomenon rather than language-specific ones. We further provide evi-dence that this representational sharing is driven by typological similarity, with transfer organized around typological ‘hubs’ — languages broadly similar to a large amount of the other studied languages. Taken together, our results characterize multilin-gual syntactic competence in LMs as the result of abstractions repurposed across languages. We fur-ther believe our results provide novel hypotheses about multilingual linguistic organization which could potentially be tested in humans. 

2 Cross-Lingual LM Interpretability 

When multilingual LMs with syntactic capabili-ties in multiple languages emerged, there was a flurry of interest in whether they learned shared representations across languages or whether they mostly learned each language independently. Early work in this space took advantage of probing — i.e., training classifiers on the internal states of an LM to recover high-level labels. Chi et al. (2020) used structural probes (Hewitt and Man-ning, 2019) to show universal-dependency rela-tions could be localized to language-agnostic sub-spaces, suggesting linguistic representations pat-tern similarly cross-lingually and Papadimitriou et al. (2021) demonstrated probes trained to re-cover high-level semantic features like ‘subject-hood’ transferred in linguistically notable ways across languages. Such results were evidence of language-agnostic linguistic features in LMs. However, probing can be over-expressive (He-witt and Liang, 2019; Voita and Titov, 2020), prompting a shift to causal methods which ensure faithfulness by manipulating internal states and checking for behavioral effect. Early iterations of these methods produced linguistic insights, finding both language-neutral and language-specific repre-sentations (Gonen et al., 2020; Srinivasan et al., 2023), and finding cross-lingual grammatical cir-cuits in English and Spanish (Ferrando and Costa-jussà, 2024). However, such variants could not elucidate the ‘features’ utilized for computation, merely localizing behavior to components. To surface such features, sparse-decomposition methods such as Sparse Auto-Encoders (SAEs) and Cross-Layer Transcoders (CLTs) were adopted. These methods likewise found cross-lingually shared feature-circuits (Brinkmann et al., 2025) and that language identity is encoded in later model layers (Harrasse et al., 2026). However, these methods find ‘interpretable features’ in untrained models (Heap et al., 2025) and are unstable across training runs (Paulo and Belrose, 2026; Leask et al., 2025). We instead use Distributed Alignment Search (DAS; Geiger et al., 2024), to localize abstract fea-tures in multilingual LMs. DAS is highly effi-cacious for syntactic interpretability (Arora et al., 2024), and has been utilized to study the repre-sentational organization of syntactic features in English filler–gap constructions (Boguraev et al., 2025) and their respective island constraints (Bogu-raev and Mahowald, 2026). Our methodology al-lows precise tests of whether causally implicated syntactic mechanisms transfer cross-lingually. 

3 Methods 

3.1 Data Stimuli We study three constructions — subject– verb number agreement, anaphoric pronoun gen-der agreement, and object extraction from an em-bedded wh -question — across fifteen languages — English, French, German, Spanish, Italian, Por-tuguese, Russian, Bulgarian, Farsi, Dutch, Chi-2Subject–Verb Number Agreement NP 1 PP NP 2 VP ENGLISH The man / The men near the cabinet is / are                                             

> ITALIAN L’uomo / Gli uomini vicino alla tavola è / sono
> BULGARIAN Мъжът / Мъжете до масата е / са
> Anaphoric Pronoun Gender Agreement NAME VP BECAUSE PRON. ENGLISH James / Mary lied because he / she
> ITALIAN Mario / Maria rise perché lui / lei
> BULGARIAN Иван / Мария вика защото той / тя
> Filler–Gap (Object) PREFIX FILLER NP VP GAP ENGLISH I know that / what she saw the / .
> ITALIAN So che / cosa lei vide il / .
> BULGARIAN Знам, че / какво тя видя него / .

Table 1: Exemplar minimal pairs for a representative subset of languages with a full set of exemplars are in §A. Our gender agreement stimuli are violable: “Mary was powerful. James lied because she told him to” , although we do not find this to affect our LMs behaviorally. Instead, we find our studied LMs to score at or above 90% accuracy on 90% (115/128) of templates and below 80% accuracy only once. 

nese, Japanese, Korean, Galician and Romanian. We design data templates as in Arora et al. (2024) to allow sampling of large sets of unique mini-mal pairs (examples in Table 1; full templates in §A). 1 Typological constraints prevent every lan-guage from being represented in each construction (e.g., Chinese does not have grammatical number). Nevertheless, there is a core set of seven languages across templates: English, German, Italian, Rus-sian, Bulgarian, Dutch, and French. Behavioral evaluation shows LMs correctly process the stim-uli with details in §C. 

Controls We design three controls. RANDOM LABELS measures the specificity of our interven-tions. Per Hewitt and Liang (2019) this control keeps the critical context but pairs it with unrelated, ungrammatical labels. An exemplar is in (1). (1) The man/men beside the car → dog/run 

Interventions demonstrating strong specificity, as desired, should not generalize to this control. OTHER PHENOMENA evaluates each core-language intervention on the other constructions. We again 

expect no transfer , as the constructions are syn-tactically distinct. Finally, following Kumon and Yanaka (2026), OOD LABELS consists of templates with the same critical context but with novel gram-matical labels. We cannot extend this control to gender agreement, as there are no cross-lingually robust alternate labels. As such, we only report re-lated results in §E. 

> 1As German and Dutch place embedded verbs clause-finally, their filler–gap templates cannot be perfectly aligned; we therefore exclude the VP position for these languages and analyze it only across the five with a non-final embedded verb.

3.2 Models 

We study four models: mGPT (1.3b params.; Shliazhko et al., 2024) and tiny-aya-base 

(3.4b params.; Salamanca et al., 2026) both ex-pressly multilingual, trained on 61 and 70+ lan-guages respectively, as well as Llama-3.2-1b 

and Llama-3.2-3b (Grattafiori et al., 2024), both not expressly multilingual, trained on generic web data, but nevertheless possessing multilingual ca-pabilities. By evaluating four models, we can study effects of architectures and training factors (e.g. model size, training data composition) on represen-tation sharing and ensure our findings reflect gen-eral trends rather than that of one model. 

3.3 Distributed Alignment Search 

DAS is a supervised interpretability method which finds low-rank d-dimensional subspaces in an LM in which a high-level causal variable can be local-ized and manipulated. Specifically, given a base value b ∈ Rn — a tensor at a specific internal site when an LM processes some input — and corre-sponding source value s ∈ Rn — the tensor at the same site when the model processes a minimally-paired input — DAS finds a subspace in which in-tervening from s → b, whilst keeping all orthog-onal components fixed, changes the output predic-tion correspondingly. This is operationalized as 

b + ( sa ⊤ − ba ⊤)a

where a ∈ Rn×d is a rotation matrix learned by minimizing the cross-entropy loss of the LM’s prediction under intervention through gradient de-scent. Following Arora et al. (2024); Boguraev et al. (2025); Boguraev and Mahowald (2026) we 3learn 1D subspaces ( d = 1 ) in the residual stream of our given LMs. When the span we are inter-vening on contains multiple tokens, we intervene on the pooled representation across the span, and when two separate template positions combine into one token (i.e., French elision producing the single token qu’il from que + il ) we evaluate both corre-sponding interventions at the combined token. 

Training and Evaluation We train interventions at each template position and model layer. Follow-ing Arora et al. (2024); Boguraev et al. (2025), we train interventions for 100 steps with a batch size of 4, filtering training items to those on which the LM is behaviorally competent. We use ODDS to evaluate the interventions. This metric measures the probability increase for the source label after intervention, relative to the probability decrease of the base label. Higher ODDS indicate higher causal efficacy. In cases of aggregation, we report the MAX ODDS : the maximum ODDS value across layers at a given position. The use of these metrics is consistent with other work using DAS for linguis-tic evaluation (Arora et al., 2024; Boguraev et al., 2025; Boguraev and Mahowald, 2026). We mea-sure these metrics across a held-out evaluation set of 100 unique minimal pairs. 

4 Experiment 1: Do LMs Share Mechanisms Cross-Lingually? 

In our first experiment, we ask whether the mech-anisms LMs use to process a given construction transfer cross-lingually. That is, we use DAS to find a subspace causally implicated in a particular syntactic phenomenon (e.g., subject–verb agree-ment) in Language A and see if that same sub-space can causally control the same phenomenon in Language B. In principle, this subspace could exploit the lexically-matched templates to dis-cover translation-equivalent alignments (à la Go-nen et al., 2020), rather than abstract syntactic fea-tures. We flag this alternative hypothesis here and return to distinguishing it from genuine syntactic abstraction in the discussions of §4 and §5. 

Setup We measure the ODDS across layers and positions for all learned interventions evaluated across the same construction multilingually, as well as on controls. We report the performance across distinct groups: within-language interven-tions — e.g., training on English subject–verb agreement and evaluating on English subject–verb agreement, cross-lingual interventions — e.g., training on English subject–verb agreement and evaluating on subject–verb agreement in all other languages, within-family interventions — e.g., training on English subject–verb agreement in En-glish and evaluating on subject–verb agreement of all other Germanic languages, and controls —RANDOM LABELS and OTHER PHENOMENA in the main text, with OOD LABELS in §E. We compare these values across layers, posi-tions, and models. We also run statistical tests on the MAX ODDS of transferred interventions nor-malized by within-language performance. This in-tuitively measures how much an LM’s mechanisms for a given language generalize to other languages with respect to its own, baseline, performance. 

Hypothesis We hypothesize there are shared syn-tactic mechanisms in LMs. That is, we expect cross-lingual transfer to be significantly above con-trols. We further expect higher transfer within a family than to the full set of evaluated languages. 

Results Our results are in Figure 2. Across lay-ers, positions, and LMs, the cross-lingual gen-eralization ODDS (green lines) are consistently higher than controls (grey lines), and at similar lev-els across phenomena. We also see the informa-tion flow through the LMs: early layers possess causally efficacious information at early positions, with the information passing through the middle layers in middle positions before reaching later layers at the final position. Pairwise t-tests with family-wise Holm-Bonferroni corrections show significantly higher transfer MAX ODDS cross-lingually than to corresponding controls ( p <

0.05 ). 2 We see qualitatively similar results for OOD LABELS, with both transfer condition’s 

MAX ODDS broadly significantly above controls. This provides confidence that our results are not just overfit to the lexical items in our templates (full results in §E). All told, these results provide evi-dence of shared, causally efficacious, syntactic sub-spaces in multilingual LMs, suggesting the emer-gence of language-agnostic mechanisms for these constructions. However, this generalization is not ubiquitous. Figure 2 visually suggests transfer is highest within families (yellow lines are consistently above green lines), but pairwise t-tests on MAX ODDS 

show mixed results. For number agreement, the   

> 2For bar charts of the MAX ODDS see §D

4{np1} {pp} {np2}         

> 0246024602460246Relative Layer Depth Odds
> Subject Verb Number Agreement {name} {vp} because
> 0246024602460246Relative Layer Depth
> Anaphoric Pronoun Gender Agreement {filler} {np} {verb} Llama−3.2−1B Llama−3.2−3B  mgpt  tiny−aya−base
> 0510 15 20 0510 15 20 0510 15 20 0510 15 20 Relative Layer Depth
> Filler−Gap (Object)
> Within Language Cross Language (all) Cross Language (Family) Other phenomenon Random labels

Figure 2: We calculate the ODDS when evaluating our trained interventions on a held-out test set of the same language they are trained on (red line), all other languages (green line), all other languages within the same family (yellow line), and across two controls (grey and black lines). We find that across all positions, phenomena, and models, interventions consistently generalize across languages with pairwise t-tests on the MAX ODDS showing significant differences between both the cross-language and control conditions ( p < 0.05 ). 

within-family and all-language groups are signif-icantly different at PP for all models, at NP 1 for 

tiny-aya-base and Llama-3.2-3b and at NP 2

for Llama-3.2-3b . For gender agreement, we find significant differences at VP and NAME for 

mGPT , Llama-3.2-3b and tiny-aya-base . Fi-nally, for filler–gaps, we find no within-family vs. cross-language difference. This may reflect the low diversity of this language set or the high within-language ODDS and consistent cross-lingual trans-fer ODDS deflating the normalized MAX ODDS we test with respect to the other constructions. 

Discussion Our results show LMs converge to abstract cross-lingual syntactic mechanisms. Fur-ther, they suggest representational sharing is not without structure, but such structure is not as sim-ple as, say, language family. However, our cur-rent experimental set-up does not lend insights into which factors are responsible for transfer. This question is centered in §5. We further find evidence against the alternative, lexical-translation subspace hypothesis. That is, our results in §E demonstrate interventions gener-alize across lexical items (both within a language and cross-lingually). These results provide evi-dence our results are not merely lexically specific, and therefore the subspaces not just translation-equivalent. We revisit this hypothesis in §5, where the typological structure of transfer further bears negative evidence for it. 

5 Experiment 2: What Drives Representational Reuse? 

We have found the syntactic mechanisms utilized by LMs can be transferred cross-lingually. How-ever, exactly what governs this transfer is unclear. Furthermore, we have not teased apart the effects of the LM itself. Here, we analyze these factors. 

Set-Up For each model, phenomenon, and posi-tion, we create an n × n matrix, M , where n is the number of languages evaluated, and cell Mi,j 

is the MAX ODDS of the interventions trained on language i when evaluated on language j. We then perform dimensionality reduction with PCA. Visu-alizing where our languages fall in this space pro-vides insights about what languages have similar transfer patterns — an implicit representation of which languages our LMs represent similarly. We also fit a linear mixed-effects model (LMEM) predicting the MAX ODDS at each po-sition from linguistic and LM-specific predictors. In particular, our LMEM has the LM, training language, and evaluation language as random ef-fects with the typological distance between two lan-guages, model size and their interaction as fixed effects. We operationalize typological distance as the cosine distance between LANG2VEC syntax vec-tors (Dryer and Haspelmath, 2013; Littell et al., 2017). For full LMEM details, see §F. 

Hypothesis We expect more transfer between typologically similar languages. We further ex-pect smaller models to show more transfer as their 5Number Agreement Gender Agreement Filler–Gap (Object) Term NP 1 (.68) PP (.71) NP 2 (.85) NAME (.69) VP (.75) BECAUSE (.76) FILLER (.73) NP (.61) VERB (.78) Typological dist. −0.577 ∗∗∗ −0.558 ∗∗∗ −0.432 ∗∗∗ −0.462 ∗∗∗ −0.320 ∗∗∗ −0.498 ∗∗∗ −0.544 ∗∗∗ −0.781 ∗∗∗ −1.04 ∗∗∗ 

Model size 0.363 0.268 0.481 0.400 0.379 0.550 −0.013 −0.151 0.224 

Typological dist. × model size −0.043 −0.100 ∗∗∗ −0.078 ∗∗ −0.055 −0.158 ∗∗∗ −0.063 0.015 0.010 −0.103 

Table 2: LMEM coefficients predicting the MAX ODDS from linguistic and architectural factors. Estimates sig-nificant under the LRT are bolded . ∗p < . 05 ; ∗∗ p < . 01 ; ∗∗∗ p < . 001 . R2

c values in parentheses next to each position. We find significant negative effects of typological distance, suggesting that transfer is stronger between typologically similar languages. Interaction effects between typological distance and model size further suggest such effects grow stronger in larger models for the tasks of Number Agreement and Gender Agreement. Bulgarian German Spanish Farsi French Galician Dutch Romanian Russian Bulgarian English Spanish Farsi Italian Portuguese Romanian Russian Bulgarian German English Spanish Farsi French Galician Italian Dutch Portuguese Romanian Russian Bulgarian English Spanish Farsi Galician Italian Dutch Romanian Russian Bulgarian German English Spanish Farsi French Galician Italian Dutch Portuguese Romanian Russian Bulgarian Farsi French Dutch Romanian Russian Bulgarian German English Spanish Farsi French Galician Italian Dutch Portuguese Romanian Russian Bulgarian German English Spanish Farsi French Galician Italian Dutch Portuguese Romanian Russian Bulgarian German English Spanish Farsi French Galician Italian Dutch Portuguese Romanian Russian Bulgarian German English Spanish Farsi French Galician Italian Dutch Portuguese Romanian Russian Bulgarian English Spanish Farsi French Galician Italian Dutch Romanian Russian Bulgarian German Farsi French Dutch Romanian Russian {np1} {np2} {pp} Llama−3.2−1B  Llama−3.2−3B  mgpt  tiny−aya−base −2.5 0.0 2.5 5.0 −2.5 0.0 2.5 5.0 −2.5 0.0 2.5 5.0 −4 −2 02−4 −2 02−4 −2 02−4 −2 02PC1 PC2 

Subject Verb Number Agreement                

> Bulgarian French Japanese Korean Romanian Russian Bulgarian Japanese Korean Romanian Chinese Bulgarian Spanish Italian Japanese Korean Dutch Portuguese Russian Chinese Bulgarian Japanese Korean Russian Chinese Bulgarian Italian Japanese Korean Portuguese Romanian Chinese English Japanese Korean Romanian Chinese Bulgarian Japanese Korean Portuguese Romanian Russian Chinese Japanese Korean Chinese English French Italian Japanese Korean Romanian Russian Chinese French Japanese Korean Bulgarian German English Spanish French Italian Japanese Korean Dutch Portuguese Romanian Russian Chinese Bulgarian English French Japanese Korean Romanian Chinese Llama−3.2−1B  Llama−3.2−3B  mgpt  tiny−aya−base −4 048 −4 048 −4 048−2 02−2 02−2 02−2 02

PC1 PC2 

Anaphoric Pronoun Gender Agreement                          

> Bulgarian German English French Italian Dutch Russian Bulgarian German English French Italian Dutch Russian Bulgarian German English French Italian Dutch Russian Bulgarian German English French Italian Dutch Russian Bulgarian German English French Italian Dutch Russian Bulgarian German English French Italian Dutch Russian Bulgarian German English French Italian Dutch Russian Bulgarian German English French Italian Dutch Russian Bulgarian English French Italian Russian Bulgarian English French Italian Russian Bulgarian English French Italian Russian Bulgarian English French Italian Russian Llama−3.2−1B  Llama−3.2−3B  mgpt  tiny−aya−base −3 −2 −1 0123 −3 −2 −1 0123 −3 −2 −1 0123−2 −1 012−2 −1 012−2 −1 012−2 −1 012

PC1 PC2 

Filler−Gap (Object) 

Language Family Germanic Romance Slavic Indo−Iranian Sino−Tibetan Japonic Koreanic 

Figure 3: We visualize our languages on the top prin-cipal components of the transfer matrix. We find lan-guage family-based clusters not to be pure. 

smaller parameter count would explicitly promote representational reuse. 

Results Our PCA analysis (Figure 3) shows some clustering by language family: Romance, Slavic and Germanic languages generally cluster with themselves, with more typologically distant languages further afield. However, closer analy-sis suggests language family alone does not explain clustering: the average silhouette score (i.e., clus-ter purity) across language families with more than one language demonstrates low cohesion (Table 3). To decipher the role of other factors, we turn to our LMEM (Table 2). Across all phenomena and positions, typological distance is a strong, signif-icant predictor of transfer, with less distance be-tween two languages associated with more transfer. That is, we consistently see stronger transfer be-tween languages that are more syntactically similar — independent of construction or model. We do not find a significant main effect of model size at any position — refuting our hypothesis that smaller models would show more transfer. We do observe significant interactions of model size and typolog-ical distance at several positions across the agree-ment templates, with it consistently indicating that typological distance becomes a stronger predictor of transfer as a model gets larger, albeit weakly. However, LANG2VEC is a coarse representation of a language’s typological aggregate and does not tell us what lower-level features may be govern-ing such transfer. We believe there are many fac-tors which shape representational similarity dur-ing training, such as tokenizer overlap between lan-guages, syntactic feature overlap, and number of cognates. In order to further characterize linguis-tic similarity, we correlate such metrics with each other, and the previously used typological distance, to show that such metrics generally covary. In particular, we take four measures of linguis-tic overlap: (1) template-level tokenizer overlap ,6Subject Verb Number Agreement                                           

> NP 1PP NP 2
> mGPT -0.080 0.201 -0.158 Llama-3.2-1b 0.065 0.029 -0.093 Llama-3.2-3b -0.179 0.097 0.120 Tiny-Aya 0.236 0.039 -0.229
> Anaphoric Pronoun Gender Agreement
> NAME VP BECAUSE mGPT 0.226 -0.038 -0.175 Llama-3.2-1b -0.011 0.015 -0.181 Llama-3.2-3b -0.093 0.081 -0.444 Tiny-Aya 0.087 -0.104 -0.322
> Filler–Gap (Object)
> FILLER NP VERB mGPT 0.387 0.543 0.106 Llama-3.2-1b 0.220 -0.019 -0.003 Llama-3.2-3b 0.297 0.232 0.259 Tiny-Aya 0.331 0.134 0.277

Table 3: Silhouette scores measuring language-family cluster purity in PCA space. Each cell is the mean sil-houette width for the given model and position. Scores range from −1 (languages closer to other families) to 

+1 (tight within-family clusters). 

calculated as the Jensen-Shannon divergence be-tween token distributions at each position of our templates, pooled across our phenomenon and po-sitions (2) corpus-level tokenizer overlap , calcu-lated as the Jensen-Shannon divergence between token distributions across all text in the FLO-RES+ dataset (a dataset consisting of 2019 sen-tences translated from English into 227 different languages; NLLB Team et al., 2024), (3) overlap in GramBank features (Skirgård et al., 2023), cal-culated as the Hamming Distance between binary feature vectors, and (4) proportion of cognates ,calculated as the proportion of cognates in the LexiBank Indo-European Cognate Relationships database (List et al., 2022; Heggarty et al., 2024; Blum et al., 2025, 2026). While there is broad cov-erage of these metrics across languages, we note there is not perfect coverage. Accordingly, we sub-set correlations to languages with such data. 3

Correlations are in Figure 4. All pairwise corre-lations are significant, and generally strongly pos-itive. Template overlap shows weaker correlation, likely due to our hand-designed templates differ-ing from the overall language distribution and the low token variance of positions with fixed inven-tories, such as FILLER (2 items) and BECAUSE (1 item). More broadly, these results suggest that ty-pological similarity is broadly an effect of many lower-level features. Unfortunately, our data is not 

> 3Each metric’s language coverage is in §G.

1.00 0.48 0.58 0.42 0.25 1.00 0.79 0.74 0.61 1.00 0.83 0.77 1.00 0.53 1.00 Template Overlap Corpus Overlap Feature Overlap (Grambank) Cognate Proportion 

> Typological Dist. Typological Dist.
> Cognate Proportion Feature Overlap (Grambank) Corpus Overlap Template Overlap |r|
> 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00

Correlation Between Distance Metrics 

Figure 4: We measure the correlation between differ-ent operationalizations of typological similarity, pooled across positions and phenomenon. All pairwise corre-lations are significantly positive (all cells p < . 01 ) and broadly strong, suggesting these factors are entangled in the model’s training data and learned representations. Correlations with template overlap tend to be weaker, reflecting the hand-designed nature of our templates. 

powered enough to perform regressions on individ-ual features, leaving such analysis to future work. 

Discussion Our results show LM representa-tional reuse is governed by high-level linguistic features, with mechanisms transferring more be-tween linguistically similar languages. We further demonstrate that LANG2VEC typological distance is strongly correlated with a broader set of features, both surface-level (tokenizer overlap) and linguis-tically driven (Grambank Feature overlap), which shape an LM’s representational development dur-ing training. These results further provide evi-dence against the lexical-translation hypothesis be-cause if our learned subspaces were merely lexi-cal translations, we would not expect there to be typologically-graded cross-lingual transfer. Our results also bear on the debate regarding the role of tokenizer overlap in cross-lingual capabili-ties. Early work demonstrated overlap aids zero-shot transfer (Pires et al., 2019), but more recent work has suggested that language-specific tokeniz-ers had benefit over shared ones (Rust et al., 2021), and that overlap can even harm syntactic perfor-mance (Limisiewicz et al., 2023). More recently still, Kallini et al. (2025) demonstrated that the se-mantic similarity of shared tokens, rather than over-lap alone, drives cross-lingual benefit. While our results do not possess enough power to adjudicate on the debate, they suggest tokenizer overlap can be beneficial for cross-lingual mechanism sharing. 7However we also find above-control transfer be-tween languages with disjoint scripts, suggesting tokenizer overlap alone is not the full story. 

6 Experiment 3: An Investigation Into the Effects of Training Data 

In their work on English filler–gap constructions, Boguraev et al. (2025) find that frequent construc-tions show more outward representational transfer, and infrequent constructions show more inward transfer. In our final experiment, we investigate whether there are similar effects of training data magnitude on multilingual representation sharing. 

Set-Up We focus on mGPT which is the only open-data model we study, trained on the multilingual Colossal Clean Crawled Corpus (mC4; Raffel et al., 2020) and Wikipedia. Due to computational con-straints, we do not rerun the full data generation pipeline, instead using per-language mC4 docu-ment counts as a proxy for training-data magnitude. To calculate inward and outward transfer, we fol-low Boguraev et al. (2025): we compute the in-and out-degree of each language as a node in the transfer matrix across a sweep of edge-thresholds, with final inward and outward transfer values the area under the sweep’s curve (AUC). 

Hypothesis We expect languages more prevalent in the training data to serve as stronger sources for transfer. Conversely, we expect less represented languages to serve as stronger sinks for transfer. 

Results Our results are in Table 4. We consis-tently see a positive correlation between training-data and out-degree, but such a correlation is weak in two of our three phenomena. Further, only the filler–gap phenomenon shows a negative cor-relation between training-data and in-degree, with such correlation being negligible. Taken together, these results show little evidence for our hypothe-sis. There is, however, strong correlation between a language’s in- and out-degree AUCs (Table 4 third row). This result suggests multilingual trans-fer is not organized by ‘sources’ and ‘sinks’, but by ‘hubs’ which promote and receive large amounts of transfer. We correlate a language’s ‘hub’-ness (mean in- and out-degree AUC) with typological centrality (average pairwise typological distance across languages) and find the two to be highly cor-related across phenomena (Table 4 fourth row). In comparison, ‘hub’-ness is generally not correlated with training data amount (Table 4 fifth row). Number Agreement Gender Agreement Filler–Gap (Object)                 

> Training Data
> r(mC4, Out-Degree) 0.18 0.63 0.36
> r(mC4, In-Degree) 0.25 0.77 -0.06
> Typological ‘Hubs’
> r(In, Out) 0.70 0.89 0.44
> r(Centr., Hub Score) 0.59 0.85 0.75
> r(mC4, Hub Score) 0.23 0.72 0.20
> Table 4: Pearson correlation, r, between different data-metrics. ‘Hub’-ness is most correlated with typological centrality, not by training data magnitude.

Discussion Our results refute our hypothesis: transfer is not strongly coupled to training-data fre-quency. Instead, we find specific languages act as ‘hubs’ in our transfer network, both receiving and promoting large amounts of representational trans-fer. We further find that ‘hub’-ness is strongly cor-related with how similar a given language is to the other languages in the network. Such results pro-vide additional evidence that multilingual represen-tational sharing is governed by abstract linguistic features. We note these correlations are computed over few items ( n = 7 -13 ) and are therefore under-powered and suggestive, rather than conclusive. 

7 Conclusion 

Linguists have long recognized seemingly parallel structure cross-lingually. These observations have led to many theories of cross-lingual regularities in linguistic mechanisms. However, thus far it has been hard to probe the degree to which internal pro-cessing overlaps in humans, and by which factors such overlap is governed. In this work, we take advantage of multilingual LMs to do just that. First, we show surface-level similarities are reflected in LM’s internal organi-zation, finding abstract mechanisms to be learned and repurposed by LMs cross-lingually. Second, we show such transfer is gradient, modulated by typological similarity between languages. Finally, we show there is little effect of training data mag-nitude on representation sharing, with transfer in-stead organized around typological ‘hubs’. Our findings point to linguistically interest-ing hypotheses regarding cross-linguistic syntac-tic structures and human multilingual processing — hypotheses we imagine tested in psycholin-guistic studies. For instance, syntactic priming 8paradigms could study whether languages showing greater transfer in LMs also exhibit stronger cross-linguistic priming in bilingual speakers. More broadly, we believe our work shows how the study of Language Models can help inform linguistic the-ory (Futrell and Mahowald, 2026). 

Limitations 

This work demonstrates how Language Models can be used to study linguistically interesting ques-tions. However the relationship between linguistic processing in neural models and humans is hotly debated (e.g., Wilcox et al., 2020; Kuribayashi et al., 2021; Oh and Schuler, 2023a,b; Oh et al., 2024; Kuribayashi et al., 2025; Piantadosi, 2024; Katzir, 2023; Mahowald et al., 2024, i.a. ). As such, our work should not be seen as providing definitive evidence about the nature of multilingual linguis-tic processing in humans, merely supporting evi-dence about the analyses general-purpose learners converge on to process such phenomena. Further, while DAS enables us to identify the presence of abstract cross-lingual mechanisms in a neural language model, we only have indirect ac-cess to the totality of the underlying mechanism via the design of the experimental stimuli: our results show that, e.g., nominal gender and verbal number features are causally related in the model’s activa-tions. DAS does not, however, reveal the complete mechanism the model uses to process the feature. For example, English marks only singular and plu-ral, while Arabic also marks dual. Transferring an intervention on the number feature from English to Arabic might be disrupted by this extra dual cat-egory. Our method could reflect the disruption — by comparing transfer quality across languages with and without a dual — but it wouldn’t be able to explicitly reveal dual number as part of the mecha-nism operating on number. As such, more work ex-plicitly reverse-engineering complete mechanisms associated with linguistic features would be useful and elucidate this distinction. However, this is out-side of our current scope. Like much work on multilingual LMs, the range of languages we study here is a small subset of hu-man languages and is skewed towards widely spo-ken ones. A more typologically diverse sample could potentially increase the richness of the con-clusions we can draw. Finally our work relies on templatically gener-ated sentences to ensure large amounts of tight minimal pairs. Such sentences are known to dif-fer from naturalistic sentences in meaningful ways. As such, extending this work to natural sentences would be a meaningful venture. 

Acknowledgments 

We thank Olaf de Rohan Wilner, Agnese Lom-bardi, Youn-Gyu Park, Siyuan Song, Qing Yao, Leticia Hanada, Branimir Boguraev, Venus Shi-razy, Maria Helena Fernandez Serrano, and Edoardo Giorgi for providing assistance with tem-plate design and judgments on resulting stimuli for the many different languages we study. We acknowledge funding from NSF CAREER grant 2339729 to Kyle Mahowald. Julius Steuer received funding from the Klaus Tschira Foundation, Hei-delberg, Germany. 

References                  

> Aryaman Arora, Dan Jurafsky, and Christopher Potts. 2024. CausalGym: Benchmarking causal inter-pretability methods on linguistic tasks. In Proceed-ings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-pers) , pages 14638–14663, Bangkok, Thailand. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Dale J. Barr, R. Levy, Christoph Scheepers, and Harry J. Tily. 2013. Random effects structure for confirma-tory hypothesis testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of memory and language , 68. Frederic Blum, Carlos Barrientos, Johannes Englisch, Robert Forkel, Simon J. Greenhill, Christoph Rzym-ski, and Johann-Mattis List. 2025. Lexibank 2: pre-computed features for large-scale lexical data. Open Research Europe , 5(126):1–27. Frederic Blum, Carlos Barrientos, Johannes Englisch, Robert Forkel, Simon J. Greenhill, Christoph Rzym-ski, and Johann-Mattis List. 2026. Lexibank 2: pre-computed features for large-scale lexical data (v2.2). Sasha Boguraev and Kyle Mahowald. 2026. Causal drawbridges: Characterizing gradient blocking of syntactic islands in transformer lms. Preprint ,arXiv:2604.13950. Sasha Boguraev, Christopher Potts, and Kyle Ma-howald. 2025. Causal interventions reveal shared structure across English filler–gap constructions. In
> Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 25021–25042. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Jannik Brinkmann, Chris Wendler, Christian Bartelt, and Aaron Mueller. 2025. Large language models share representations of latent grammatical concepts

9across typologically diverse languages. In Proceed-ings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 6131–6150. Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics. Ethan A. Chi, John Hewitt, and Christopher D. Man-ning. 2020. Finding universal grammatical relations in multilingual BERT. In Proceedings of the 58th An-nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 5564–5577. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Noam Chomsky. 1965. Aspects of the theory of syntax .MIT Press. Bernard Comrie. 1989. Language universals and lin-guistic typology: Syntax and morphology . Univer-sity of Chicago press. Matthew S. Dryer and Martin Haspelmath, editors. 2013. WALS Online (v2020.4) . Zenodo. Javier Ferrando and Marta R. Costa-jussà. 2024. On the similarity of circuits across languages: a case study on the subject-verb agreement task. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 10115–10125. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Richard Futrell and Kyle Mahowald. 2026. How lin-guistics learned to stop worrying and love the lan-guage models. Behavioral and Brain Sciences ,49:e198. Atticus Geiger, Duligur Ibeling, Amir Zur, Ma-heep Chaudhary, Sonakshi Chauhan, Jing Huang, Aryaman Arora, Zhengxuan Wu, Noah Goodman, Christopher Potts, and 1 others. 2025. Causal ab-straction: A theoretical foundation for mechanistic interpretability. Journal of Machine Learning Re-search , 26(83):1–64. Atticus Geiger, Zhengxuan Wu, Christopher Potts, Thomas Icard, and Noah Goodman. 2024. Finding alignments between interpretable causal variables and distributed neural representations. In Proceed-ings of the Third Conference on Causal Learning and Reasoning , volume 236 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 160–187. PMLR. Hila Gonen, Shauli Ravfogel, Yanai Elazar, and Yoav Goldberg. 2020. It’s not Greek to mBERT: Induc-ing word-level translations from multilingual BERT. In Proceedings of the Third BlackboxNLP Workshop on Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP , pages 45–56. Association for Computational Linguistics. Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schel-ten, Alex Vaughan, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mi-tra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark, and 542 others. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models. Preprint , arXiv:2407.21783. Joseph H Greenberg and 1 others. 1963. Some univer-sals of grammar with particular reference to the or-der of meaningful elements. Universals of language ,2(1):73–113. Abir Harrasse, Florent Draye, Punya Syon Pandey, Zhi-jing Jin, and Bernhard Schölkopf. 2026. Tracing multilingual representations in llms with cross-layer transcoders. Preprint , arXiv:2511.10840. Robert J Hartsuiker, Martin J Pickering, and Eline Veltkamp. 2004. Is syntax separate or shared be-tween languages? cross-linguistic syntactic priming in spanish-english bilinguals. Psychological science ,15(6):409–414. John Hawkins. 2014. Cross-Linguistic Variation and Efficiency . Oxford University Press. Thomas Heap, Tim Lawson, Lucy Farnik, and Laurence Aitchison. 2025. Sparse autoencoders can interpret randomly initialized transformers. arXiv e-prints ,pages arXiv–2501. Paul Heggarty, Cormac Anderson, and Matthew Scar-borough. 2024. Indo-european cognate relationships database (ie-cor version 1.1). John Hewitt and Percy Liang. 2019. Designing and interpreting probes with control tasks. In Proceed-ings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th Interna-tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-cessing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 2733–2743. Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics. John Hewitt and Christopher D. Manning. 2019. Astructural probe for finding syntax in word represen-tations. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 4129–4138. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Jennifer Hu, Jon Gauthier, Peng Qian, Ethan Wilcox, and Roger Levy. 2020. A systematic assessment of syntactic generalization in neural language mod-els. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 1725–1744. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Jaap Jumelet, Leonie Weissweiler, Joakim Nivre, and Arianna Bisazza. 2026. MultiBLiMP 1.0: A mas-sively multilingual benchmark of linguistic minimal pairs. Transactions of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics , 14:193–216. Julie Kallini, Dan Jurafsky, Christopher Potts, and Mar-tijn Bartelds. 2025. False Friends are not foes: Inves-tigating vocabulary overlap in multilingual language 

10 models. In Findings of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 21138– 21154. Association for Computational Linguistics. Roni Katzir. 2023. Why large language models are poor theories of human linguistic cognition: A reply to Piantadosi. Biolinguistics , 17:e13153. Ryoma Kumon and Hitomi Yanaka. 2026. Fine-grained analysis of shared syntactic mechanisms in language models. In Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 44866–44891, San Diego, California, United States. Association for Computational Linguistics. Tatsuki Kuribayashi, Yohei Oseki, Takumi Ito, Ryo Yoshida, Masayuki Asahara, and Kentaro Inui. 2021. Lower perplexity is not always human-like. In Pro-ceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics and the 11th In-ternational Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 5203– 5217. Association for Computational Linguistics. Tatsuki Kuribayashi, Yohei Oseki, Souhaib Ben Taieb, Kentaro Inui, and Timothy Baldwin. 2025. Large language models are human-like internally. Transac-tions of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics , 13:1743–1766. Alexandra Kuznetsova, Per B. Brockhoff, and Rune H. B. Christensen. 2017. lmerTest package: Tests in linear mixed effects models. Journal of Statistical Software , 82(13):1–26. Patrick Leask, Bart Bussmann, Michael Pearce, Joseph Bloom, Curt Tigges, Noura Al Moubayed, Lee Sharkey, and Neel Nanda. 2025. Sparse autoen-coders do not find canonical units of analysis. In 

International Conference on Learning Representa-tions , volume 2025, pages 53617–53642. Tomasz Limisiewicz, Jiří Balhar, and David Mareček. 2023. Tokenization impacts multilingual language modeling: Assessing vocabulary allocation and over-lap across languages. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pages 5661–5681. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Tal Linzen and Marco Baroni. 2021. Syntactic structure from deep learning. Annual Review of Linguistics ,7(1):195–212. Tal Linzen, Emmanuel Dupoux, and Yoav Goldberg. 2016. Assessing the ability of LSTMs to learn syntax-sensitive dependencies. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 4:521– 535. Johann-Mattis List, Robert Forkel, Simon J. Greenhill, Christopher Rzymski, Johannes Englisch, and Rus-sell D. Gray. 2022. Lexibank, a public repository of standardized wordlists with computed phonological and lexical features. Scientific Data , 9:316. Patrick Littell, David R. Mortensen, Ke Lin, Kather-ine Kairis, Carlisle Turner, and Lori Levin. 2017. URIEL and lang2vec: Representing languages as typological, geographical, and phylogenetic vectors. In Proceedings of the 15th Conference of the Euro-pean Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Volume 2, Short Papers , pages 8–14. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Kyle Mahowald, Anna A Ivanova, Idan A Blank, Nancy Kanwisher, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Evelina Fe-dorenko. 2024. Dissociating language and thought in large language models. Trends in cognitive sci-ences , 28(6):517–540. Saima Malik-Moraleda, Dima Ayyash, Jeanne Gallée, Josef Affourtit, Malte Hoffmann, Zachary Mineroff, Olessia Jouravlev, and Evelina Fedorenko. 2022. An investigation across 45 languages and 12 language families reveals a universal language network. Na-ture neuroscience , 25(8):1014–1019. Christopher D. Manning, Kevin Clark, John Hewitt, Ur-vashi Khandelwal, and Omer Levy. 2020. Emer-gent linguistic structure in artificial neural networks trained by self-supervision. Proceedings of the Na-tional Academy of Sciences , 117(48):30046–30054. Kanishka Misra. 2022. minicons: Enabling flexible be-havioral and representational analyses of transformer language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.13112 .Kanishka Misra and Najoung Kim. 2026. A sys-tematic framework for generating novel experimen-tal hypotheses from language models. Preprint ,arXiv:2408.05086. NLLB Team, Marta R. Costa-jussà, James Cross, Onur Çelebi, Maha Elbayad, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Hef-fernan, Elahe Kalbassi, Janice Lam, Daniel Licht, Jean Maillard, Anna Sun, Skyler Wang, Guillaume Wenzek, Al Youngblood, Bapi Akula, Loic Barrault, Gabriel Mejia Gonzalez, Prangthip Hansanti, and 20 others. 2024. Scaling neural machine translation to 200 languages. Nature , 630(8018):841–846. Elisabeth Norcliffe, Alice C Harris, and T Florian Jaeger. 2015. Cross-linguistic psycholinguistics and its critical role in theory development: Early begin-nings and recent advances. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience , 30(9):1009–1032. Byung-Doh Oh and William Schuler. 2023a. Transformer-based language model surprisal predicts human reading times best with about two billion training tokens. In Findings of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 ,pages 1915–1921. Association for Computational Linguistics. Byung-Doh Oh and William Schuler. 2023b. Why does surprisal from larger transformer-based lan-guage models provide a poorer fit to human reading times? Transactions of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics , 11:336–350. 

11 Byung-Doh Oh, Shisen Yue, and William Schuler. 2024. Frequency explains the inverse correlation of large language models’ size, training data amount, and surprisal’s fit to reading times. In Proceedings of the 18th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2644–2663. Association for Computational Linguistics. Isabel Papadimitriou, Ethan A. Chi, Richard Futrell, and Kyle Mahowald. 2021. Deep subjecthood: Higher-order grammatical features in multilingual BERT. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: Main Volume , pages 2522–2532. Association for Computational Linguistics. Gonçalo Paulo and Nora Belrose. 2026. Sparse autoen-coders trained on the same data learn different fea-tures. In International Conference on Learning Rep-resentations , volume 2026, pages 35748–35760. Steven T. Piantadosi. 2024. Modern language models refute Chomsky’s approach to language. In Edward Gibson and Moshe Poliak, editors, From fieldwork to linguistic theory: A tribute to Dan Everett . Language Science Press. Telmo Pires, Eva Schlinger, and Dan Garrette. 2019. How multilingual is multilingual BERT? In Pro-ceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics , pages 4996– 5001. Association for Computational Linguistics. Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. 2020. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text trans-former. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,21(140):1–67. Phillip Rust, Jonas Pfeiffer, Ivan Vulić, Sebastian Ruder, and Iryna Gurevych. 2021. How good is your tokenizer? on the monolingual performance of mul-tilingual language models. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Vol-ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 3118–3135. Association for Computational Linguistics. Alejandro R. Salamanca, Diana Abagyan, Daniel D’souza, Ammar Khairi, David Mora, Saurabh Dash, Viraat Aryabumi, Sara Rajaee, Mehrnaz Mofakhami, Ananya Sahu, Thomas Euyang, Brittawnya Prince, Madeline Smith, Hangyu Lin, Acyr Locatelli, Sara Hooker, Tom Kocmi, Aidan Gomez, Ivan Zhang, and 7 others. 2026. Tiny aya: Bridging scale and multi-lingual depth. Preprint , arXiv:2603.11510. Oleh Shliazhko, Alena Fenogenova, Maria Tikhonova, Anastasia Kozlova, Vladislav Mikhailov, and Ta-tiana Shavrina. 2024. mgpt: Few-shot learners go multilingual. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 12:58–79. Hedvig Skirgård, Hannah J. Haynie, Damián E. Blasi, Harald Hammarström, Jeremy Collins, Jay J. Latarche, Jakob Lesage, Tobias Weber, Alena Witzlack-Makarevich, Sam Passmore, Angela Chira, Luke Maurits, Russell Dinnage, Michael Dunn, Ger Reesink, Ruth Singer, Claire Bowern, Patience Epps, Jane Hill, and 86 others. 2023. Grambank reveals the importance of genealogical constraints on linguistic diversity and highlights the impact of language loss. 

Science Advances , 9(16). Anirudh Srinivasan, Venkata Subrahmanyan Govin-darajan, and Kyle Mahowald. 2023. Counterfactu-ally probing language identity in multilingual mod-els. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Multi-lingual Representation Learning (MRL) , pages 24– 36. Association for Computational Linguistics. Elena Voita and Ivan Titov. 2020. Information-theoretic probing with minimum description length. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) ,pages 183–196. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Alex Warstadt and Samuel R Bowman. 2022. What ar-tificial neural networks can tell us about human lan-guage acquisition. In Algebraic structures in natural language , pages 17–60. CRC Press. Alex Warstadt, Alicia Parrish, Haokun Liu, Anhad Mo-hananey, Wei Peng, Sheng-Fu Wang, and Samuel R. Bowman. 2020. BLiMP: The benchmark of linguis-tic minimal pairs for English. Transactions of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics , 8:377–392. Ethan Wilcox, Roger Levy, Takashi Morita, and Richard Futrell. 2018. What do RNN language mod-els learn about filler–gap dependencies? In Proceed-ings of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP ,pages 211–221. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Ethan G. Wilcox, Jon Gauthier, Jennifer Hu, Peng Qian, and Roger P. Levy. 2020. On the predictive power of neural language models for human real-time com-prehension behavior. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society , volume 42. Ethan Gotlieb Wilcox, Richard Futrell, and Roger Levy. 2024. Using computational models to test syntactic learnability. Linguistic Inquiry , 55(4):805–848. Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pier-ric Cistac, Tim Rault, Remi Louf, Morgan Funtow-icz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, and 3 others. 2020. Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language pro-cessing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations , pages 38–45. Association for Computational Linguistics. 

12 Zhengxuan Wu, Atticus Geiger, Aryaman Arora, Jing Huang, Zheng Wang, Noah Goodman, Christopher Manning, and Christopher Potts. 2024. pyvene: A li-brary for understanding and improving PyTorch mod-els via interventions. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 3: System Demon-strations) , pages 158–165. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. 

A Templates 

Exemplar stimuli we utilize to train and evaluate our interventions can be seen in Table 5. We also provide exemplar stimuli for our controls: exem-plar stimuli for RANDOM LABELS can be seen in Ta-ble 6, and exemplar stimuli for OOD LABELS can be seen in Table 7. We publish the full templates on Zenodo. 4

B Intervention Models 

We publish all intervention models on Hugging Face. 5 The code used for model training, evalua-tion and analysis is available on GitHub. 6

C Behavioral Results 

Before attempting to study the internals of the LMs on our three phenomena, we must first con-firm that they are behaviorally competent with the given task. We utilize a targeted syntactic evalua-tion paradigm inspired by the method developed by Wilcox et al. (2018) to study RNN’s competence of filler–gap constructions. The method is as follows: given two minimal pairs, b and s, with correspond-ing labels ℓb and ℓs, an LM should correctly predict that the surprisal, S, of each given label is higher given the correct context than in the incorrect con-text. Formally, the metric, termed ACCURACY, is a binary measure that is calculated as: ACCURACY =



1 if S(ℓb | b) < S (ℓb | s)

and S(ℓs | b) > S (ℓs | s),

0 otherwise. The LMs behavioral results can be seen in Fig-ure 5. Specifically, for each construction we study (column facets) and each LM (row facets), we show the mean-averaged performance over 160 ran-domly sampled minimal pairs. We can see that our   

> 4Templates
> 5Intervention models
> 6aTraining and evaluation code

LMs are broadly competent at processing such con-structions, scoring at or above 90% accuracy on 90% (115/128) of templates and below 80% accu-racy only once ( Llama‑3.2‑1b on Bulgarian num-ber agreement). This gives us evidence that the LMs are syntactically competent with these phe-nomena, thus licensing our next experiments. Digging deeper into these results, it is evident that the expressly multilingual LMs are generally the most performant on the templates, perhaps as expected. Interestingly, however, Llama-3.2-3b 

does not lag far behind them. Llama-3.2-1b is the least performant of all the models on the task, however still showing strong performance. We do not see any systematic effects of language family, although we do note that the majority of these lan-guages, and families, are high-resource and thus likely not data scarce during training. 

D Max-Odds 

The bar charts with the normalized MAX ODDS for each of our five experimental groups in Experiment One can be seen in Figure 6. We further provide the Holm-Bonferroni corrected p-values of all re-ported comparisons for the main results in Table 8, and for the OOD LABELS in Table 9. 

E Out-of-Distribution Controls 

As described in §3.1, we also evaluate the gener-alization of our interventions to a set of lexically disjoint labels, which are still grammatically cor-rect and exhibiting the same phenomenon we are testing. As noted above, we can only do this for two of our three phenomena — subject–verb num-ber agreement and filler–gap object extraction — because there is not an alternative pronoun we can replace the ‘he/she’ labels in our templates with ro-bustly. Our results can be seen in Figure 7. Broadly, we see the same pattern as in our main set of results. Generalization across languages is consistently sig-nificantly higher than our across-phenomenon con-trol for both phenomena, and consistently signif-icantly higher than transfer to our random-label control in the case of subject–verb agreement. In the filler–gap case, we find generalization to OOD labels directionally correct for all comparisons. However, accompanying t-tests are broadly not sig-nificantly at most positions — only showing sig-nificance at the VP position for both Llama mod-els and tiny-aya-base and the NP position for 13 Subject Verb Number Agreement Anaphoric Pronoun Gender Agreement Filler-Gap (Object) tiny-aya-base  mgpt  Llama-3.2-1B  Llama-3.2-3B Dutch English German French Galician Italian Portuguese Romanian Spanish Bulgarian Russian Farsi Dutch English German French Italian Portuguese Romanian Spanish Bulgarian Russian Chinese Japanese Korean Dutch English German French Italian Bulgarian Russian 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 Accuracy Germanic Romance Slavic Indo-Iranian Sino-Tibetan Japonic Koreanic Figure 5: Behavioral performance of each model on each of our templatic stimuli. We broadly see strong perfor-mance from all of our models on all templates. Generally multilingual LMs perform the best, but both Llama 

models show strong performance as well. All bars but thirteen are above 90% performance, with twelve of those above 80%. The only bar below 80% is Llama‑3.2‑1b on Bulgarian number agreement. {np1} {np2} {pp} 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 Max Odds (normalized to self−to−self) Subject Verb Number Agreement {name} {vp} because Anaphoric Pronoun Gender Agreement {filler} {np} {verb} Llama−3.2−1B  Llama−3.2−3B  mgpt  tiny−aya−base Filler−Gap (Object) Within Language Cross Language (all) Cross Language (Family) Other phenomenon Random labels 

Figure 6: We take the MAX ODDS across layers for each model at each position, before normalizing by the within-language value (red bar). We see strong performance in both our cross-language (green bar) and within-family (yellow bar) transfer conditions, with both being significantly above both controls in all cases when tested with t-tests with a Holm-Bonferroni correction. We further find the within-family transfer to be significantly higher than the cross-language bar in a select few comparisons, but for this to not hold more broadly. 

14 LANGUAGE NP 1 PP NP 2 VP English The man / The men near the cabinet is / are Spanish El hombre / Los hombres cerca de la alacena es / son German Der Mann / Die Männer neben dem Schrank ist / sind Dutch De man / De mannen naast de kast is / zijn French L’homme / Les hommes près de la table est / sont Italian L’uomo / Gli uomini vicino alla tavola è / sono Portuguese O homem / Os homens perto da mesa é / são Romanian Bărbatul / Bărbații lângă fereastră este / sunt Bulgarian Мъжът / Мъжете до масата е / са 

Russian Мужчина / Мужчины перед шкафом является / являются 

Farsi ﻣﺮﺩ / ğ ﻣﺮﺩﺍں ﺎﺭ ğ ﻛٮ ﻛﻤﺪ ĥ ﺍﺳٮ / ﺪğٮĥ ﻫﺴٮ 

Galician O home / Os homes preto da fiestra é / son (a) Subject–Verb Number Agreement LANGUAGE NAME VP BECAUSE PRONOUN English James / Mary lied because he / she Spanish Miguel / María corrió porque él / ella German Thomas / Maria aß weil er / sie Dutch Jan / Anna loog omdat hij / zij French Pierre / Marie chuchota parce qu’ il / elle Italian Mario / Maria rise perché lui / lei Portuguese João / Maria sussurra porque ele / ela Romanian Ion / Maria a râs pentru că el / ea Bulgarian Иван / Мария вика защото той / тя 

Russian Иван / Мария ходил / ходила потому что он / она 

Korean 철수 군이 / 지은 양이 떨렸다, 왜냐하면 그가 / 그녀가 

Japanese はるとくんが / さくらちゃんが 来た、 なぜなら 彼が / 彼女が 

Chinese 何先生 / 袁夫人 笑了, 因为 他 / 她 

(b) Anaphoric Pronoun Gender Agreement LANGUAGE PREFIX FILLER NP VP GAP English I know that / what she saw the / . French Je sais qu’ / ce qu’ elle a vu ça / . German Ich weiß, dass / was sie — das / sah Dutch Ik weet dat / wat zij — hem / zag Italian So che / cosa lei vide il / . Russian Я знаю, что / кого она видела это / . 

Bulgarian Знам, че / какво тя видя него / . 

(c) Filler–Gap (Object). 

Table 5: Exemplar minimal pairs per language for each construction. The minimal differences upstream (denoted by the two options separated by a ‘/’) in the NP 1, NAME, and FILLER positions each correspond to the given labels in the VP, PRONOUN, and GAP positions respectively. Such minimal pairs are used to evaluate LM linguistic competence, and to ensure that our causal interventions are successful. ‘-’ indicates positions where the given construction has no item. This appears only in German and Dutch Filler–Gap stimuli as they are V2 languages, mandating any embedded verbs appear clause-final. The contrast at the VP position for Russian gender agreement ( ходил /ходила )reflects the past-tense verb’s obligatory agreement with the subject, and is not an additional label. 

Llama-3.2-1b . We attribute this to two main causes. First, there is a relatively lesser amount of samples for this phenomenon, which can make similar effect sizes less statistically significant, and secondly the raw transfer ODDS are similar cross-linguistically as in the other phenomena, but the raw within-language transfer is much higher. As such, the normalized MAX ODDS are artificially deflated, leading to closer comparisons. These two effects likely cause the lack of significance we see. We also find there to be little difference between the unselective cross-lingual condition, and the family limited cross-lingual condition, with there being significant differences only at the NP 1 posi-15 LANGUAGE NP 1 PP NP 2 VP English The man / The men near the cabinet dog / give Spanish El hombre / Los hombres cerca de la alacena perro / dar German Der Mann / Die Männer neben dem Schrank Hund / geben Dutch De man / De mannen naast de kast hond / geven French L’homme / Les hommes près de la table chien / donner Italian L’uomo / Gli uomini vicino alla tavola cane / dare Portuguese O homem / Os homens perto da mesa cão / dar Romanian Bărbatul / Bărbații lângă fereastră câine / da Bulgarian Мъжът / Мъжете до масата куче / дава 

Russian Мужчина / Мужчины перед шкафом собака / дать 

Farsi ﻣﺮﺩ / ğ ﻣﺮﺩﺍں ﺎﺭ ğ ﻛٮ ﻛﻤﺪ ĸ ﺳک / ğ ﺩﺍﺩں 

Galician O home / Os homes preto da fiestra can / dar (a) Subject–Verb Number Agreement (RANDOM LABELS) LANGUAGE NAME VP BECAUSE PRONOUN English James / Mary lied because dog / give Spanish Miguel / María corrió porque perro / dar German Thomas / Maria aß weil Hund / geben Dutch Jan / Anna loog omdat hond / geven French Pierre / Marie chuchota parce qu’ chien / donner Italian Mario / Maria rise perché cane / dare Portuguese João / Maria sussurra porque cão / dar Romanian Ion / Maria a râs pentru că câine / da Bulgarian Иван / Мария вика защото куче / дава 

Russian Иван / Мария ходил / ходила потому что собака / дать 

Korean 철수 군이 / 지은 양이 떨렸다, 왜냐하면 개 / 주다 

Japanese はるとくんが / さくらちゃんが 来た、 なぜなら 犬 / あげる 

Chinese 何先生 / 袁夫人 笑了, 因为 狗 / 给 

(b) Anaphoric Pronoun Gender Agreement (RANDOM LABELS) LANGUAGE PREFIX FILLER NP VP GAP English I know that / what she saw dog / give French Je sais qu’ / ce qu’ elle a vu chien / donner German Ich weiß, dass / was sie — Hund / geben Dutch Ik weet dat / wat zij — hond / geven Italian So che / cosa lei vide cane / dare Russian Я знаю, что / кого она видела собака / дать 

Bulgarian Знам, че / какво тя видя куче / дава 

(c) Filler–Gap (Object, RANDOM LABELS). 

Table 6: Sampled exemplar minimal pairs per language for each construction for RANDOM LABELS: the stimulus is identical to the true construction, but the counterfactual target are arbitrary tokens. We expect a well-calibrated intervention to be specific and not generalize to these. 

tion and PP position for tiny-aya-base and mGPT 

respectively. These results, in broadly matching what we find on our critical stimuli, provide us confidence that our interventions are not merely overfit to the lexi-cal items we utilize in our templates, and instead in-dicative of general syntactic mechanisms we have uncovered. 

F Linear-Mixed Effects Modeling Details 

We perform all regressions with the lmerTest 

package in R (Kuznetsova et al., 2017). We fit a lin-ear mixed-effects model at each position with our dependent variable as the MAX ODDS at each train-ing — evaluation-set pair. We treat the LM, train-ing language, and evaluation language as crossed random effects. Our fixed effects are the typolog-ical distance between the given languages, model size, and their interaction, with both scaled by z-16 LANGUAGE NP 1 PP NP 2 VP English The man / The men near the cabinet has / have Spanish El hombre / Los hombres cerca de la alacena tiene / tienen German Der Mann / Die Männer neben dem Schrank hat / haben Dutch De man / De mannen naast de kast heeft / hebben French L’homme / Les hommes près de la table a / ont Italian L’uomo / Gli uomini vicino alla tavola ha / hanno Portuguese O homem / Os homens perto da mesa tem / têm Romanian Bărbatul / Bărbații lângă fereastră are / au Bulgarian Мъжът / Мъжете до масата може / могат                                                           

> Russian Мужчина / Мужчины перед шкафом имеет / имеют
> Farsi ﻣﺮﺩ /ğﻣﺮﺩﺍں ﺎﺭ ğﻛٮ ﻛﻤﺪ ﺩﺍﺭﺩ /ﺪğﺩﺍﺭٮ
> Galician O home / Os homes preto da fiestra está / están (a) Subject–Verb Number Agreement (OOD LABELS) LANGUAGE PREFIX FILLER NP VP GAP English I know that / what she saw a / , French Je sais que / ce que elle a vu cela / , German Ich weiß, dass / was sie —das / fand Dutch Ik weet dat / wat zij —hem / vond Italian So che / cosa lei vide un / , Russian Я знаю, что / кого она видела то / ,
> Bulgarian Знам, че / какво тя видя това / ,
> (b) Filler–Gap (Object, OOD LABELS).

Table 7: Sampled exemplar minimal pairs per language for each construction in the OOD LABELS control. As inspired by Kumon and Yanaka (2026): the stimulus is identical to the true construction, but the counterfactual target is a plausible yet out-of-distribution continuation. We expect a well-trained intervention to target the abstract feature of interest, and thus generalize to these. 

scoring before regression. To estimate the β coef-ficients, we fit our models with REML, and to es-timate the significance of each term, we refit them with ML to calculate the likelihood-ratio test for each fixed-effect term against a nested model with that term removed. We fit the full model as per Barr et al. (2013), namely with maximal random ef-fects structure, removing collinear slopes until our model converges — in this case this leaves us with an intercepts-only model. The final full model for-mula can be seen in Equation (2). max_odds ∼ typological_distance ∗ model_size 

+ (1 | train_lang )+ (1 | eval_lang )+ (1 | model )

(2) 

G Metric Coverage 

As mentioned in §5, the metrics we utilize to calcu-late typological distance do not have perfect cover-age over our languages. We report the coverage in Table 10. Grambank does not have entries for Ger-man, Bulgarian, Spanish, and Romanian because it focuses on typological breadth and diversity. Fur-thermore, the cognate data we utilize, Cognate Pro-portion (IECOR) is limited to Indo-European lan-guages, so it is unavailable for Galician, Chinese, Japanese, and Korean. 

H Computational Details 

We access all models studied through the 

transformers package Wolf et al. (2020), per-form behavioral evaluations using the minicons 

package (Misra, 2022) to compute surprisals and train DAS using the pyvene package (Wu et al., 2024). Training and evaluation is done using the same hyperparameters found in the extensive sweep performed by Arora et al. (2024). All experiments were ran on a cluster of 4 NVIDIA A40 (46 GB each, driver 610.43.02) GPUs, 64 CPU cores, 251 GB RAM, Linux/RHEL 8. Exper-iments were run as independent single-GPU jobs, up to 4 concurrently. Computational estimates on this hardware can be seen in Table 11. 17 Filler–Gap (Object) Subject Verb Number Agreement Anaphoric Pronoun Gender Agreement Model FILLER NP VERB NP 1 PP NP 2 NAME VP BECAUSE OTHER PHENOMENA (Control: specificity) 

Llama-3.2-1b 1.2 × 10 −9∗∗∗ 5.2 × 10 −7∗∗∗ 1.5 × 10 −7∗∗∗ 3.0 × 10 −40 ∗∗∗ 2.2 × 10 −28 ∗∗∗ 1.9 × 10 −34 ∗∗∗ 1.3 × 10 −32 ∗∗∗ 5.6 × 10 −30 ∗∗∗ 2.7 × 10 −22 ∗∗∗ 

Llama-3.2-3b 1.9 × 10 −7∗∗∗ 4.7 × 10 −6∗∗∗ 5.9 × 10 −9∗∗∗ 1.2 × 10 −41 ∗∗∗ 1.7 × 10 −35 ∗∗∗ 1.4 × 10 −40 ∗∗∗ 1.3 × 10 −31 ∗∗∗ 2.4 × 10 −35 ∗∗∗ 1.2 × 10 −33 ∗∗∗ 

mGPT 1.0 × 10 −5∗∗∗ 6.1 × 10 −6∗∗∗ 3.9 × 10 −7∗∗∗ 2.8 × 10 −35 ∗∗∗ 8.3 × 10 −36 ∗∗∗ 2.4 × 10 −33 ∗∗∗ 3.1 × 10 −22 ∗∗∗ 8.3 × 10 −25 ∗∗∗ 1.9 × 10 −32 ∗∗∗ 

tiny-aya-base 5.9 × 10 −9∗∗∗ 1.2 × 10 −9∗∗∗ 6.9 × 10 −9∗∗∗ 8.4 × 10 −58 ∗∗∗ 1.3 × 10 −39 ∗∗∗ 3.1 × 10 −52 ∗∗∗ 1.0 × 10 −44 ∗∗∗ 1.6 × 10 −40 ∗∗∗ 6.6 × 10 −49 ∗∗∗ 

RANDOM LABELS (Control: selectivity) 

Llama-3.2-1b 2.0 × 10 −4∗∗∗ 3.9 × 10 −5∗∗∗ 1.3 × 10 −6∗∗∗ 1.7 × 10 −31 ∗∗∗ 8.0 × 10 −16 ∗∗∗ 5.9 × 10 −17 ∗∗∗ 4.1 × 10 −33 ∗∗∗ 2.2 × 10 −25 ∗∗∗ 1.0 × 10 −12 ∗∗∗ 

Llama-3.2-3b 4.1 × 10 −4∗∗∗ 5.4 × 10 −4∗∗∗ 7.4 × 10 −8∗∗∗ 7.0 × 10 −32 ∗∗∗ 4.1 × 10 −25 ∗∗∗ 1.4 × 10 −25 ∗∗∗ 1.2 × 10 −31 ∗∗∗ 8.7 × 10 −31 ∗∗∗ 3.1 × 10 −24 ∗∗∗ 

mGPT 0.002 ∗∗ 0.004 ∗∗ 2.6 × 10 −4∗∗∗ 1.8 × 10 −24 ∗∗∗ 7.6 × 10 −15 ∗∗∗ 7.0 × 10 −23 ∗∗∗ 1.8 × 10 −24 ∗∗∗ 6.7 × 10 −19 ∗∗∗ 1.7 × 10 −12 ∗∗∗ 

tiny-aya-base 4.0 × 10 −4∗∗∗ 4.1 × 10 −4∗∗∗ 5.4 × 10 −7∗∗∗ 1.1 × 10 −48 ∗∗∗ 3.3 × 10 −23 ∗∗∗ 2.3 × 10 −35 ∗∗∗ 6.6 × 10 −45 ∗∗∗ 2.6 × 10 −37 ∗∗∗ 1.2 × 10 −37 ∗∗∗ 

CROSS LANGUAGE (WITHIN-FAMILY) (Test: within-family vs. all-language transfer) 

Llama-3.2-1b 0.843 1.000 1.000 0.081 † 0.013 ∗ 0.278 0.066 † 0.208 0.941 

Llama-3.2-3b 0.843 1.000 1.000 0.039 ∗ 0.007 ∗∗ 0.001 ∗∗ 0.003 ∗∗ 0.039 ∗ 0.738 

mGPT 0.843 1.000 1.000 0.217 0.002 ∗∗ 0.422 4.7 × 10 −5∗∗∗ 0.002 ∗∗ 0.382 

tiny-aya-base 0.799 1.000 1.000 0.019 ∗ 0.003 ∗∗ 0.422 1.9 × 10 −4∗∗∗ 0.007 ∗∗ 0.843 

Table 8: Holm-bonferroni corrected p-values (correction applied within each comparison type, pooled across phenomena/models/positions) for all pairwise t-tests comparing cross-lingual transfer (CROSS LANGUAGE (ALL)) against our two selectivity controls and against family-restricted transfer, for Experiment One (§4;Figure 6). RAN-DOM LABELS and OTHER PHENOMENA are our controls: cross-lingual transfer should, and does, significantly exceed both. CROSS LANGUAGE (WITHIN-FAMILY) instead tests whether transfer is stronger among typologically related languages than to the full evaluated set; results here are mixed. †p < . 1; ∗p < . 05 ; ∗∗ p < . 01 ; ∗∗∗ p < . 001 ;significant cells bolded. 

I LLM Usage Statement 

LLMs were utilized in the development of code and analyses, particularly for the adaptation of re-lated codebases (namely those of Arora et al., 2024; Boguraev et al., 2025) to our work, as well as generating initial versions of some templates before refinement with native speaker informants. LLMs were further used to provide feedback on the clarity of our writing during the editing process. 18 Filler–Gap (Object) Subject Verb Number Agreement Model FILLER NP VERB NP 1 PP NP 2

OTHER PHENOMENA (Control: specificity) 

Llama-3.2-1b 3.3 × 10 −7∗∗∗ 2.5 × 10 −6∗∗∗ 1.2 × 10 −6∗∗∗ 5.2 × 10 −39 ∗∗∗ 7.2 × 10 −32 ∗∗∗ 3.3 × 10 −40 ∗∗∗ 

Llama-3.2-3b 4.4 × 10 −6∗∗∗ 3.2 × 10 −6∗∗∗ 6.5 × 10 −7∗∗∗ 3.0 × 10 −42 ∗∗∗ 2.4 × 10 −40 ∗∗∗ 1.1 × 10 −43 ∗∗∗ 

mGPT 0.042 ∗ 8.9 × 10 −6∗∗∗ 4.3 × 10 −6∗∗∗ 5.2 × 10 −30 ∗∗∗ 5.3 × 10 −44 ∗∗∗ 4.3 × 10 −55 ∗∗∗ 

tiny-aya-base 8.9 × 10 −6∗∗∗ 1.2 × 10 −8∗∗∗ 1.6 × 10 −9∗∗∗ 1.1 × 10 −51 ∗∗∗ 5.7 × 10 −45 ∗∗∗ 2.4 × 10 −59 ∗∗∗ 

RANDOM LABELS (Control: selectivity) 

Llama-3.2-1b 0.427 0.011 ∗ 7.8 × 10 −5∗∗∗ 1.6 × 10 −31 ∗∗∗ 7.2 × 10 −19 ∗∗∗ 2.3 × 10 −22 ∗∗∗ 

Llama-3.2-3b 0.427 0.427 1.8 × 10 −4∗∗∗ 1.2 × 10 −32 ∗∗∗ 4.0 × 10 −30 ∗∗∗ 3.3 × 10 −28 ∗∗∗ 

mGPT 0.427 0.488 0.155 1.2 × 10 −19 ∗∗∗ 6.3 × 10 −22 ∗∗∗ 2.9 × 10 −42 ∗∗∗ 

tiny-aya-base 0.327 0.488 3.4 × 10 −5∗∗∗ 8.7 × 10 −42 ∗∗∗ 8.9 × 10 −30 ∗∗∗ 7.6 × 10 −42 ∗∗∗ 

CROSS LANGUAGE (WITHIN-FAMILY) (Test: within-family vs. all-language transfer) 

Llama-3.2-1b 1.000 1.000 1.000 0.783 0.083 † 0.442 

Llama-3.2-3b 1.000 1.000 1.000 0.304 0.133 0.148 

mGPT 1.000 0.839 1.000 0.304 0.023 ∗ 0.311 

tiny-aya-base 1.000 1.000 1.000 0.012 ∗ 0.082 † 0.442 

Table 9: Holm-bonferroni corrected p-values (correction applied within each comparison type, pooled across phe-nomena/models/positions) for the OOD LABELS (§E; Figure 7). As in Table 8, RANDOM LABELS and OTHER PHENOMENA are selectivity controls compared against CROSS LANGUAGE (ALL) transfer, and CROSS LANGUAGE (WITHIN-FAMILY) tests family-restricted vs. all-language transfer. †p < . 1; ∗p < . 05 ; ∗∗ p < . 01 ; ∗∗∗ p < . 001 ;significant cells bolded. 

Metric English (en) German (de) Dutch (nl) French (fr) Italian (it) Bulgarian (bg) Russian (ru) Spanish (es) Portuguese (pt) Romanian (ro) Galician (gl) Farsi (fa) Chinese (zh) Japanese (ja) Korean (ko) Template Overlap 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3

Corpus Overlap 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3

Feature Overlap (Grambank) 3 7 3 3 3 7 3 7 3 7 3 3 3 3 3

Cognate Proportion 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 7 3 7 7 7

Typological Dist. 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3

Table 10: Language coverage for each distance/overlap metric used in the typological-distance correlation analysis. Feature Overlap (Grambank) is missing for German, Bulgarian, Spanish, and Romanian because Grambank lacks entries for them. The cognate data we utilize, Cognate Proportion (IECOR) is limited to Indo-European languages, so it is unavailable for Galician, Chinese, Japanese, and Korean. 

19 {np1} {np2} {pp} Llama−3.2−1B  Llama−3.2−3B  mgpt  tiny−aya−base 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 Max Odds (normalized to self−to−self) Within Language Cross Language (all) Cross Language (Family) Other phenomenon Random labels 

Subject−Verb Number Agreement {filler} {np} {verb} Llama−3.2−1B  Llama−3.2−3B  mgpt  tiny−aya−base 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 Max Odds (normalized to self−to−self) Within Language Cross Language (all) Cross Language (Family) Other phenomenon Random labels 

Filler−Gap (Object) Figure 7: We evaluate our interventions on syntactically appropriate but lexically disjoint labels from our training set. We find our results to broadly hold in this setting. 

Training Evaluation Model / Phenomenon Runs # Interventions Seconds per Intervention Time (h) Pairs # Interventions Seconds per Intervention Time (h) 

mGPT (24 layers) number agreement 12 72 8.2 2.0 579 72 1.94 22.4 gender agreement 13 72 8.2 2.1 534 72 2.83 30.3 filler–gap 7 72 8.1 1.1 294 72 5.14 30.2 

total 32 – – 5.3 1407 – – 82.9 

tiny-aya-base (36 layers) number agreement 12 108 16.9 6.1 579 108 3.09 53.6 gender agreement 13 108 16.6 6.5 534 108 3.06 49.1 filler–gap 7 108 16.9 3.5 294 108 4.64 40.9 

total 32 – – 16.1 1407 – – 143.6 

Llama-3.2-1b (16 layers) number agreement 12 48 9.2 1.5 579 48 2.31 17.9 gender agreement 13 48 10.6 1.8 534 48 3.22 22.9 filler–gap 7 48 9.5 0.9 294 48 5.50 21.6 

total 32 – – 4.2 1407 – – 62.3 

Llama-3.2-3b (28 layers) number agreement 12 84 16.0 4.5 579 84 2.99 40.4 gender agreement 13 84 20.9 6.3 534 84 3.28 40.9 filler–gap 7 84 15.4 2.5 294 84 6.93 47.6 

total 32 – – 13.3 1407 – – 128.9 ALL 128 – – ≈39 5628 – – ≈418 

Table 11: Per-model compute cost on a single NVIDIA A40 GPU. A run is one language, with interventions at every position and layer. As there are three positions evaluated for each phenomenon, this just totals three times the number of layers in each model. Times reported reflect the median value of all runs performed during our experiments. 

20