Title: Medical-Checklist: Assessing the Comprehension of Medical Images by Multimodal Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.21998

Published Time: Mon, 27 Jul 2026 00:25:11 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
> IEEE TRANSACTIONS AND JOURNALS TEMPLATE 1

# Medical-Checklist: Assessing the Comprehension of Medical Images by Multimodal Models 

Bannapol Limanond, Masanori Suganuma, and Takayuki Okatani, Member, IEEE 

Abstract — This paper introduces a new benchmark test, Medical-Checklist, for assessing medical multimodal mod-els. The recent advancements in multimodal models have demonstrated significant potential in the field of medical vision-language tasks. However, it is becoming increas-ingly clear that evaluating these models’ performance, whether they are applied to natural or medical images, is challenging. The critical question is whether the models can accurately understand an input image while associ-ating it with relevant input text. To address this, Medical-Checklist imposes a binary test on the models: they are given an image and two captions, where one is correct and the other incorrect, and the model must select the cor-rect one. The incorrect caption contains a single medical concept (word or phrase) that is inaccurately substituted from the correct caption. Although the task is simple, this simplicity enables the unified assessment of diverse multi-modal models designed and learned on different principles. It also enables us to verify whether models correctly un-derstand a wide range of medical concepts across various medical sub-domains. Medical-Checklist is designed to re-duce potential biases in data and to enable evaluation of the models’ ability to handle out-of-distribution inputs, which were difficult in existing datasets. When evaluating four state-of-the-art medical multimodal models with Medical-Checklist, it was revealed that despite their excellent per-formance in specific tasks such as Med-VQA, they may not correctly understand images, suggesting a long journey ahead for clinical application. The dataset and code will be made public upon acceptance. 

Index Terms — Large Language Model, Multimodal Dataset, Vision and Language 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

# MULTIMODAL models have demonstrated remarkable success in recent years, achieving state-of-the-art re-sults in vision-language tasks [1]–[3]. Recent advancements in the field have led to the development of multimodal large language models (MLLMs), which effectively combine advanced pre-trained large language models (LLMs) with a vi-sion encoder, enabling the transformation of visual inputs into the space of natural language texts [4]–[7]. This integration 

Manuscript received July 27, 2026. This work was supported by JST SPRING, Grant Number JPMJSP2114. © 2026 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. 

enables the MLLMs to leverage the unmatched capabilities of LLMs such as robust language generation, zero-shot transfer capabilities, etc. These advancements have also led to significant progress in the medical field. Multimodal models, trained on various data in the medical domain, have exhibited significantly improved capabilities, particularly in processing and understanding com-plex medical images and associated text [8]–[12]. These mod-els have set new benchmarks in a variety of medical vision-language tasks such as medical visual question answering (Med-VQA), patient report generation, and more [13]–[23]. Nevertheless, we should not uncritically accept the afore-mentioned achievements. The difficulty in accurately assessing the performance of multimodal models is becoming more apparent in the domain of natural images. Multimodal models, such as CLIP, have demonstrated exceptional performance in tasks like zero-shot image classification [1], [2], [7]. However, it has been shown that these models only possess a superficial understanding of images [24]–[26]. In the medical sector, there have recently been multiple papers assessing the capabilities of GPT-4V, which is considered to be the most sophisticated MLLM for now, in the context of medical image diagnosis [27]–[32]. Yet, the findings of these studies are markedly inconsistent, with some suggesting the model is ready for practical application [27]–[30] and others arguing it is entirely unfit for such purposes [31], [32]. This variation in findings emphasizes the complexity of evaluating multimodal models accurately. In other words, achieving outstanding results on a specific dataset for a particular task does not automatically validate the model’s effectiveness, especially in the real world. The dataset may contain inherent biases, which the model could simply be exploiting. Additionally, the challenge of evaluating models against out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs—inputs that differ from those seen during training—remains. These point to limitations of the conventional evaluation methodology, which involves splitting a closed dataset into training and testing sets. In this study, we propose a new benchmark, Medical-Checklist, to evaluate medical multimodal models from a different perspective than prior work. The benchmark consists of a large number of medical images, each paired with two captions: one that correctly describes the image and one that contains a single randomly substituted medical term (a word or phrase), creating an incorrect caption. For example, consider arXiv:2607.21998v1 [cs.CV] 24 Jul 2026 2 IEEE TRANSACTIONS AND JOURNALS TEMPLATE Body Part , Organ        

> POS  Computer tomography (CT) of the chest showing
> soft tissue thickening around LMS Bronchi
> NEG  Computer tomography (CT) of the chest showing
> soft tissue thickening around LMS Hip structure
> POS  Plain x -ray of the chest revealing bilateral
> pleural effusion
> NEG  Arteriography of the chest revealing bilateral
> pleural effusion
> POS
> Hydronephrosis appearance in sonography
> NEG  Angioedemas , Hereditary appearance in
> sonography
> Disease Syndrome
> Diagnostic Procedure

Medical multi -modal models 

> Body Part , Organ

POS 

NEG 

> Diagnostic Proc.

POS  

> POS : Positive Caption NEG : Negative Caption

NEG  

> Medical -Checklist Dataset (Sec. 2) Benchmarking Models (Sec. 3)
> Fig. 1. Example tests from Medical-Checklist (left) and the overview of benchmarking medical multimodal models (right).

a chest x-ray image paired with contrasting captions: “Plain x-ray of the chest revealing bilateral pleural effusion” (correct) versus “Arteriography of the chest revealing bilateral pleural effusion”(incorrect); see Fig. 1. Since the incorrect captions are generated through ran-dom substitution, most of them are medically nonsensical. Therefore, a model with correct medical knowledge should be able to select the correct caption. The research question of this study is whether state-of-the-art multimodal models specialized for medical imaging can actually do so. This research question distinguishes our work from prior studies on multimodal AI applications to medical images, such as medical VQA. While multiple-choice questions are also common in existing medical VQA datasets, the distractor options are typically clinically plausible. This is natural, as the primary goal of those benchmarks is to assess whether a model can make fine-grained clinical decisions in difficult scenarios. In contrast, the incorrect captions in our benchmark—although grammatically valid due to noun phrase substitution—are clinically implausible. Our benchmark aims to test whether medical multimodal AI models can detect such clearly in-correct answers. The motivation is to assess whether these models possess basic medical knowledge and, more broadly, to understand—together with existing benchmark results—what they truly comprehend and what they do not. Accurately identifying what an AI model does and does not understand remains a major challenge across AI research in general. Medical-Checklist uses a simple binary-choice task, which offers several advantages. First, it allows for an increase in test diversity, enabling a more comprehensive assessment of models’ understanding of various medical concepts. Moreover, it aids in evaluating models’ generalizability across in- and out-of-distribution inputs. Additionally, this simplicity permits the comparison of diverse multimodal models designed for varied tasks and trained using different methodologies and datasets 1. Ultimately, it contributes to mitigating inherent biases, preventing the possibility of models exploiting such biases. For instance, binary tests can be designed to guarantee an equal distribution between the two possible outcomes, ensuring fairness in the evaluation process. We evaluate four state-of-the-art medical multimodal mod-els [9]–[12]. Although all of them demonstrate strong per-formance on existing benchmarks, none of them are able to pass the Medical-Checklist: they consistently fail to distinguish clearly incorrect answers from correct ones with the expected level of accuracy. This indicates that despite their success in answering clinically plausible VQA questions, these models lack a fundamental understanding of core medical concepts. Further analysis is presented in the following sections. 

II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Multi-modal Medical Tasks 

Due to the rapid advancements in medical multimodal models [10], [33], [34], the field of multimodal medical                                                      

> 1A task that involves selecting the more relevant option aligns well with CLIP’s training objective and is thus natural for the models based on CLIP, while it may be slightly disadvantageous for MLLMs. However, considering the level of dialog capability expected of MLLMs, this task is sufficiently primitive, and high performance should reasonably be expected—making this evaluation method appropriate. AUTHOR et al. : TITLE 3
> TABLE I DISTRIBUTION OF MEDICAL -C HECKLIST CATEGORIES AND ALTERNATIVE TERMS
> Category Count Percentage Example of Alternative Terms Spatial Concept 12,027 18.37 Junctional, Linear, Unifocal, Foraminal, Loop, Proximity, Left, Right, Ovoid shape, Parasternal Pathologic Function 3,902 5.96 Stenosis, Atelectasis, Lysis, Microcalcification, Reflux, Microaneurysm, Hypoplasia, Hyperplasia Body Part or Organ 13,851 21.16 Conjunctiva, Permanent permolar tooth, Scaphoid bone, Cerebral Peduncle, Zygomatic bone Diagnostic Procedure 6,354 9.71 Urethrogram, CT, MRI, Autopsy, Cystography, Esophagram, Radioscopy, Plain chest X-ray Body Location 3,584 5.47 T6 level, C3 level, Spleen acupuncture point SP1, Intracranial, Intervertebral, Coronal Therapeutic Procedure 6,930 10.59 Balloon Dilatation, Extraction, Amputation, Intramedullary Nailing, Suction drainage, Acid Etching Disease or Syndrome 9,332 14.26 Biloma, Cholelithiasis, Pituitary Diseases, Arthropathy, Empyema, Mycetoma, Hematuria Medical Device 3,637 5.56 Apron, Blades (device), Prosthesis, Cannula device, transducers, Gastric Balloon Physiologic Function 463 0.71 Electric impedance, Tropism, Blood circulation, Muscle contraction, Excretory Function Injury or Poisoning 1,080 1.65 Retropneumoperitoneum, Tissue damage, Periprosthetic fractures, Microfractures, Incised wound Body Substance 970 1.48 Exudate, Dental cementum, Feces, Dentin, Trichobezoars, Hyaline Substance, Venous plasma Body Space 1,666 2.54 Prepontine Cistern, Pulp Canals, Decussation, Dento-alveolar joint, L5-S1 intervertebral space Body System 187 0.29 Peripheral nervous System, Autonomic nervous System, Skeletal system, Genitourinary system Anatomical Abnormality 1,250 1.91 Absent left coronary artery, Dilation of ureter, Cortical irregularity, Subperiosteal bone resorption Biologic Function 231 0.35 Bioluminescence, Anabolism, Ingestion, Process of secretion, Corticogenesis, Biological Signaling
> Total 65,464 100.0

benchmarks has attracted significant attention in recent times. Notable tasks within this domain include medical image-text classification, medical image-caption retrieval, report genera-tion, biomedical visual chatbot, chest X-ray phrase grounding, and medical visual question answering. Medical image-text classification [18] involves the multi-label classification of text describing medical experiment methods, based on their corresponding images. Medical image-caption retrieval [17], [19] facilitates the process of retrieving captions that correspond to given texts and vice versa. Report generation [12], [16], [20], [21] encompasses the automated creation of medical reports that summarize findings from images, as well as impressions from physicians. Biomedical visual chatbot [10] enables an open-ended interac-tive dialogue between humans and an AI system, focusing on medical images. Chest X-ray phrase grounding [35] involves the model being presented with medical phrases, after which it is required to identify and highlight specific regions within a chest X-ray image. Medical visual question answering (Med-VQA) [13]–[15], [22], [23], [33], [36]–[38] involves models that are tasked with responding to medical questions associated with images. This process requires a sophisticated integration of visual understanding and contextual knowledge to provide accurate answers based on the presented visual data. However, benchmarks used in existing studies often exhibit limitations. First, these studies often limit their evaluations to results that are not directly comparable, as different works may select various tasks for assessment, thereby complicating comparative analyses. This issue arises due to the incompat-ibility of certain visual language models with specific tasks. For example, Med-CLIP [11] cannot be directly fine-tuned for Med-VQA. Moreover, tasks such as medical image-text classification and Med-VQA are susceptible to inherent biases, primarily because the answer data distribution is not evenly balanced. This imbalance could potentially lead to models exploiting these biases. Additionally, the robustness of a model against input noise remains uncertain. For example, it is unclear how a model would perform if a medical term within the input were replaced by a random term — a modification that could significantly impact its interpretability and accuracy. Ultimately, with the exception of the biomedical visual chatbot task, existing studies limit their evaluations to “in-distribution” settings, where models are tested on a separate portion of the same dataset used for training. This approach restricts insight into the models’ true generalization capabilities, as it does not assess their performance on entirely new, unseen data. 

B. Evaluation of MLLMs in Medical Image Diagnosis 

Several preprints of studies have recently been published that test the application of GPT-4V [39] in the medical image diagnosis. Interestingly, they present two divergent perspectives. Several studies advocate for the utility of GPT-4V. This includes the comparative studies of the performance between human physicians and GPT-4V [27], [28]. One study [29] shows that GPT-4V passed the full USMLE exam 2,showing potential for clinical decision support. Another re-search group [30] focuses on prompt engineering with the model, demonstrating remarkable performance improvements. However, other studies draw the exact opposite conclusion. A paper [31] presents a qualitative evaluation of GPT-4V on multiple clinical tasks, e.g., disease diagnosis and report generation, raising questions about the model’s suitability for clinical tasks. Additional findings [32] identify seven key limitations of GPT-4V’s performance in clinical diagnosis contexts, including an over-reliance on textual information and difficulties in assessing medical object sizes. This conflict highlights the challenge of accurately assessing multi-modal models on medical tasks, which demand a thorough compre-hension of medical concepts. Additionally, it underscores the inherent difficulty in guaranteeing no overlap between training and testing data when evaluating proprietary models like GPT-4V, for which the training datasets are not publicly disclosed. 

III. M ETHOD 

We create a benchmark test, named Medical-CheckList, to evaluate multimodal models’ understanding of medical  

> 2https://www.usmle.org/ 4IEEE TRANSACTIONS AND JOURNALS TEMPLATE

... thickening 

around LMS 

Bronchi 

Plain x -ray of 

the chest... 

Term Linking SciBERT 

X-ray 

Chest        

> Term #1: X-ray
> •Canonical Name
> •Category: Diagnostic..
> Term #2:Chest
> •Canonical Name
> •Category: Body Loca ...

# ⋮   

> Term #1: X-ray
> •Canonical Name
> •Category: Diagnostic..

Filtering 

Lung 

> Medical Terms

SciBERT 

Term Linking 

Filtering         

> Positive Term :Bronchi
> •Canonical Name
> •Category: Body Part...
> Negative Term :Hip Structure
> •Canonical Name
> •Category :Body Part, Organ, or..

Replacing 

> Body Part
> Terms
> Medical Device
> Terms
> Body Location
> Terms
> Diagnostic Procedure
> Terms
> Body System
> Terms
> 9 more
> categories
> terms Body Substance
> Terms

CT of the chest showing soft tissue 

thickening around LMS Hip Structure 

> Medical
> Term  Pool
> Term
> Extraction
> Negative Caption
> Generation
> Random
> select
> Fig. 2. Overview of the dataset creation process.

imagery combined with textual descriptions. We adopt a binary classification approach, inspired by studies in natural image understanding [24]–[26], enabling us to cover a wide array of medical concepts across various subdomains. It requires the models to choose between two captions: one accurately describes the image, and the other, referred to as a negative caption, includes a subtle yet critical modification—a change of a single medical term (e.g., changing ‘Bronchi’ to ‘Hip structure’), as shown in Fig. 1. 

A. Dataset Specification 

The Medical-Checklist contains 65,464 binary tests clas-sified by 15 diverse categories of medical concepts, such as ‘Disease or Syndrome’ and ‘Body Part, Organ, or Organ Component.’ It is built upon 53,556 images, sourced from the MedICat [20] and ROCO datasets [17]. The two datasets contain a variety of medical imaging modalities, such as radiology, histology, and scope procedures, and collectively contain over 300,000 medical image-text pairs. Each test entry includes: 1) an input image; 2) a positive caption, which is a caption associated with the image and sourced from the original dataset; 3) a negative caption, generated by altering a single medical term (word or phrase) in the positive caption; and 4) the category of both the replaced and the replacing terms, out of 15 pre-defined categories, ensuring both belong to the same category. Overall, there are 6,293 unique medical terms involved in these replacements; see Table I. Additionally, Fig. 3 provides further examples from the Medical-Checklist dataset. 

B. Design of the Dataset 

1) Desirable Properties: To achieve the stated goal, we aim for the benchmark to meet three criteria. First, it should evaluate models’ resilience across a continuous spectrum of input distributions, ranging from in-distribution to out-of-distribution. For example, models should maintain robustness against input anomalies, like mismatches between an image and its caption. Second, the benchmark should minimize statistical biases to ensure fair and accurate model evaluations. An example of such bias is when questions starting with “What is” consistently favor A in a binary test between A and B. Additionally, the distribution of answers within the entire dataset may disproportionately favor A over B. Notably, many existing VQA-based benchmarks in the medical field do not meet both of these criteria. Third, the benchmark should facilitate the comparison of results across all types of medical multimodal models, including those trained with image-text contrastive loss, image-text matching loss, and multimodal large language models. The Medical-Checklist is designed to meet the above criteria as much as possible. It covers a diverse range of captions across various domains. The task of differentiating between the correct and similar negative counterpart enables us to assess models’ robustness against input anomalies. Moreover, it adjusts the answers for binary classification to be evenly distributed at 50% each, thereby mitigating inherent bias. 

2) Choosing Categories of Medical Concepts: To facilitate the evaluation of models tailored to various medical subdo-mains, we selected 15 categories of medical concepts. These categories are chosen based on the Q&A pairs found in exist-ing multimodal Med-VQA benchmarks. To ensure consistent use of terminology, we employ the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) [40]. The 15 categories are: ‘Anatomical Ab-normality,’ ‘Body Part, Organ, or Organ Component,’ ‘Medical Device,’ ‘Body Substance,’ ‘Body System,’ ‘Spatial Concept,’ ‘Body Space or Junction,’ ‘Body Location or Region,’ ‘Diag-AUTHOR et al. : TITLE 5

nostic Procedure,’ ‘Therapeutic or Preventive Procedure,’ ‘Bio-logic Function,’ ‘Physiologic Function,’ ‘Pathologic Function,’ ‘Disease or Syndrome,’ and ‘Injury or Poisoning.’ Detailed definitions of each concept and its clinical relevance can be found in the supplementary material and on the official UMLS website. 3 

> 3) Process of Dataset Creation:

We develop the dataset in two steps; see Fig. 2. In the first step, we extract medical terms from the captions of the two mentioned datasets, selecting only those that fit into the 15 concept categories. Specifically, we employ SciBERT [41] to identify medical terms in the cap-tions, noting that a single caption may contain several terms. Following this, we assign a canonical name and category to each identified term by referencing the UMLS database, utilizing a string overlap search method based on character 3-grams. Terms that do not match any of the 15 predefined categories are discarded. Finally, we sort and categorize the remaining terms according to their medical categories, creating a term pool that allows structured access in the subsequent step. In the second step, we create negative captions for the image-caption pairs. We start with each image-caption pair by identifying a medical term from the term pool within the caption. Next, we randomly select an alternative term from the same medical category in the pool and replace the original term with this selected one. The negative captions are intentionally crafted to include errors that should be identifiable by a model trained to understand medical images and terminology, regardless of their medical plausibility. It is important to note that a caption may contain multiple terms, leading to the generation of an equal number of negative captions. This process results in the creation of tuples, each consisting of an image, the original positive caption, and a negative caption, together forming a single binary test. Throughout this process, we use SciSpacy [42] to handle text analysis.  

> 4) Quality Control and Dataset Validation:

Our creation pro-cess follows two UMLS database criteria to ensure quality of the benchmark: Concept IDs (CUIs) and Semantic Types (TUIs). The CUI ensures that negative terms are not synonyms or semantic variants of positive terms. For example, the pro-cess cannot swap “heart attack” with “myocardial infarction” because both terms map to the same CUI. Similarly, the TUI ensures that positive and negative terms belong to the same medical category. These constraints prevent systematic errors and noise in our benchmark. We also conducted manual validation to verify the reliability of our creation process. We randomly sampled 100 cases and manually verified: (1) whether the extracted terms were medically relevant, and (2) whether the terms were accurately linked to their corresponding CUIs and TUIs. We observed zero errors in both term extraction and semantic linking. 

C. Benchmarking Multimodal Models 

To assess multimodal models, we assign them the task of selecting the correct caption from a tuple consisting of 

> 3https://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/index.html

an image, a positive caption, and a negative caption. As it is a binary classification task, we use average classification accuracy as the evaluation metric, with a chance rate of 50%. We further assess model confidence and calibration via cross-entropy loss and the Brier score. There are various multimodal models, each designed and trained differently, necessitating careful consideration for their evaluation. In this study, we evaluate three types of models. The first category includes models trained using image-text contrastive loss, such as Med-CLIP [11] and PMC-CLIP [12]. For these models, we leverage the image-text contrastive loss [24], [25] to choose between two input captions based on the higher similarity score, which the model interprets as the correct answer. The second category comprises models trained with image-text matching loss (excluding image-text contrastive loss) like M3AE [9]. Here, we use the image-text matching loss to determine the correct caption. The third category involves MLLMs, such as Med-LLaVA [10]. MLLMs are typically trained on next-token-prediction tasks using plain image-caption pairs or visual instruction tuning data and do not directly provide a similarity score between an image and a caption. To facilitate selection among two captions, we use a prompting method [43], which effectively guides the model in making a choice. The prompt is as follows: 

Algorithm 1 Prompt for evaluating MLLMs. Given the following image and two captions, which caption more accurately describes the image? Please answer with either ‘Caption A’ or ‘Caption B’ only. The image is displayed here: 〈image 〉.Caption A: 〈original caption 〉.Caption B: 〈negative caption 〉.We randomize which of Captions A and B contain the positive caption to prevent bias. It is important to note that we reviewed the prompts used in related studies and selected the most effective one for comparison across all models. While this method may not be perfect, similar challenges are encountered in any research involving MLLMs. Furthermore, if a model fails to respond accurately to a plain, standard prompt, this failure should be considered a limitation of the model. 

IV. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS 

We conducted experiments to evaluate existing medical multimodal models using the Medical-Checklist. 

A. Evaluated Models 

We evaluate the four models: Med-CLIP [11], PMC-CLIP [12], M3AE [9], and LLaVA-Med [10]. We use the models provided in their respective official Github repositories, along with their code where fine-tuning was necessary. It should be noted that during tests of the LLaVA-Med model on Medical-Checklist using the specified prompting method, it often does not follow the instructions correctly. Specifically, it produces outputs in formats other than the 6 IEEE TRANSACTIONS AND JOURNALS TEMPLATE Spatial Concept                        

> POS  Magnetic resonance T2 weighted image
> showing Foraminal extensions of the cysts
> NEG  Magnetic resonance T2 weighted image
> showing Linear extensions of the cysts
> POS NEG  Posteroanterior radiography … Loop of the
> Endoscopes …
> Posteroanterior radiography … Loop of the
> Artificial cardiac pacemaker …
> POS  CT spine showing a mass at level of C3
> level with marked osseous destruction
> NEG  CT spine showing a mass at level of T12
> level with marked osseous destruction
> Body Location
> Medical Device
> POS : Positive Caption NEG : Negative Caption
> Pathologic Func .
> POS  Panoramic Radiography showing the area
> of Osteolysis distal to 28
> NEG  Panoramic Radiography showing the area
> of Atelectasis distal to 28
> POS  Panoramic Radiography showing Pinched
> space of the right TMJ
> NEG  Panoramic Radiography showing Injury
> due to exposure to external cause …
> Injury & Poison
> POS  Lateral -view radiograph of a wrist that
> underwent Arthrodesis …
> NEG  Lateral -view radiograph of a wrist that
> underwent doxorubicin …
> Therapeutic Proc.

Fig. 3. More qualitative examples from the Medical-Checklist. 

intended ‘Caption A’ or ‘Caption B.’ As a result, we have excluded the test entries where it fails—accounting for 51.6% of all tests—and only calculated the average accuracy using the remaining entries (48.4%) for its evaluation. The other three models do not have this issue and are evaluated across the entire Medical-Checklist. To deal with this issue with LLaVA-Med, we conduct an additional experiment where we fine-tune the LLaVA-Med model with instruction tuning, before the binary test. We select ‘Therapeutic Procedure’ from among the 15 medical concept categories, and perform the instruction tuning using the test entries related to this category. By employing this method, the model followed the instructions correctly, successfully identifying all of the entities involved (100.0%) during its evaluation. Subsequently, we assess the performance of the modified model across tests covering the other 14 concepts. In this experiment with LLaVA-Med, we additionally test more variants of the LLaVA-Med models. Specifically, we fine-tune the original LLaVA-Med model on two tasks simulta-neously: instruction following and either PathVQA [22] or SLAKE [14], ensuring that there is no forgetting of either task. For fine-tuning on the Med-VQA tasks, we adhere to the method outlined in [10]. The motivation is to assess the impact of fine-tuning on Med-VQA datasets on the model’s performance on the Medical-Checklist. Our results confirm that this simultaneous training does not negatively affect the model’s performance on the Med-VQA tasks. 

B. Results of the Four Models 

Table II presents the results from the initial experiments evaluating four multimodal models. A major observation is 

TABLE II ACCURACY , B RIER SCORE AND CROSS -ENTROPY LOSS OF FOUR MEDICAL MULTIMODAL MODELS ON MEDICAL -C HECKLIST 

Model Accuracy Brier score Log loss Random 50.00 0.2500 0.6931 MedCLIP 50.12 0.2508 0.6932 PMC-CLIP 49.72 0.3336 1.0860 M3AE 61.76 0.2227 0.6496 LLaVA-Med 54.25 0.2669 0.7440 

that all four models exhibit relatively poor performance, with accuracy ranging from 49% to 61%—barely above the chance rate of 50%. This suggests that despite their effectiveness in Med-VQA tasks, these models struggle to understand images in conjunction with their paired captions genuinely. MedCLIP performs at chance on both accuracy and cross-entropy loss, confirming a near–random guessing strategy. Its only above-chance performance occurs in the body system category, which depends on coarse, image-wide features. In contrast, the other categories are fine-grained and require pre-cise region-to-term alignment that current CLIP-based models fail to achieve. PMC-CLIP achieved the highest accuracy in the Body System category. It records the highest cross-entropy loss and Brier score, indicating it makes incorrect predictions with confidence and is poorly calibrated. This outcome aligns with previous studies on multimodal models for natural image understanding, which have found that CLIP models often fail to capture the fine-grained relationships between specific image regions and the corresponding words or phrases in AUTHOR et al. : TITLE 7                                                                                                                 

> TABLE III PER -CATEGORY ACCURACY OF THE FOUR MEDICAL MULTIMODAL MODELS ON THE MEDICAL -C HECKLIST
> Models MedCLIP PMCCLIP M3AE LLaVA-Med Spatial Concept 49.96 49.11 53.72 53.91 Pathologic Function 51.20 47.43 57.81 55.49 Body Part or Organ 51.41 49.68 68.70 55.79 Diagnostic Procedure 47.92 51.65 76.22 58.25 Body Location 51.42 51.31 67.91 55.31 Therapeutic Procedure 51.05 48.28 54.83 50.53 Disease or Syndrome 48.48 49.48 60.51 53.13 Medical Device 49.32 51.85 59.36 51.51 Physiologic Function 43.84 46.00 47.94 58.26 Injury or Poisoning 46.11 52.12 53.51 49.84 Body Substance 47.21 51.54 52.88 54.10 Body Space 49.51 50.78 66.38 53.86 Body System 69.51 46.52 45.98 59.21 Anatomical Abnormality 59.12 51.52 55.44 53.52 Biologic Function 35.93 36.79 38.09 50.51
> TABLE IV PERFORMANCE OF INSTRUCTION -FOLLOWING FINE -TUNED
> LL AVA-M ED VARIANTS ON THE MEDICAL -C HECKLIST
> Model LLaVA-Med+ LLaVA-Med SLAKE+ LLaVA-Med PathVQA+ Average 65.07 60.18 69.72 Spatial Concept 69.63 61.00 69.41 Pathologic Function 61.28 59.87 63.17 Body Part or Organ 65.96 64.84 74.09 Diagnostic Procedure 63.77 59.07 69.58 Body Location 65.04 60.38 71.09 Disease or Syndrome 65.26 61.04 70.14 Medical Device 66.43 50.45 67.42 Physiologic Function 66.09 50.54 72.14 Injury or Poisoning 58.06 51.11 67.96 Body Substance 63.81 58.56 68.97 Body Space 52.76 52.22 59.72 Body System 45.99 56.15 63.64 Anatomical Abnormality 47.92 54.72 59.12 Biologic Function 78.35 48.05 77.49

captions [44]. In contrast, M3AE achieves the highest accuracy of all evaluated models, although its performance remains low at 61%. This limitation reflects the model’s reliance on an im-age–text matching objective. However, the performance gain over other models stems from the use of masked image modeling and masked language modeling objectives. These results highlight the need for training objectives that enable models to distinguish fine-grained pathological anomalies in medical images and texts. Surprisingly, the results show that LLaVA-Med is overconfi-dent and poorly calibrated. This result is inconsistent with its high performance in the standard evaluations. Although this setup may not fully reflect the optimal use of MLLMs—each of which may favor specific Q&A formats—it is important to note that the ability to engage in diverse interactions about image content is a fundamental expectation for MLLMs. A potential concern is whether our benchmark can be solved through text-only reasoning since most negative captions are medically nonsensical. However, this concern does not hold for two reasons. First, the architecture of CLIP-based models and M3AE processes each caption independently—these models have no mechanism to directly compare positive and negative captions to detect textual absurdity. Second, if the task were solvable via text-only reasoning, we would expect MLLMs to achieve near-perfect accuracy. Instead, LLaVA-Med achieves only 54.25% accuracy. The consistent failures across all four evaluated models confirm that our benchmark cannot be solved through text-only reasoning and requires cross-modal under-standing. 

C. Results of LLaVA-Med Variants 

To investigate whether LLaVA-Med’s mediocre perfor-mance is due to its failure to follow instructions, we conduct a second experiment by applying task instruction tuning before testing. We observe a substantial improvement in instruction following: the instruction-tuned LLaVA-Med models achieve a 100% success rate, significantly outperforming the original model’s 48.4% success rate. Table IV shows their performance on the Medical-Checklist. We evaluate three variations: the LLaVA-Med model fine-tuned only on the instruction-following task, denoted as LLaVA-Med+, and two versions of LLaVA-Med fine-tuned on SLAKE and PathVQA, as well as instruction tuning, denoted as ‘LLaVA-Med-SLAKE+’ and ‘LLaVA-Med-PathVQA+,’ re-spectively. Despite the successful instruction tuning, LLaVA-Med+ shows only a modest improvement in accuracy, rising to 65.07% from 59.52%. The highest performance is achieved by LLaVA-Med-PathVQA+, with an accuracy of 69.72%. Yet, this is still considered low, underscoring the earlier conclusion that the models lack a true understanding of the input images and captions. The slight advantage of LLaVA-Med-PathVQA+ over LLaVA-Med+ suggests that fine-tuning on PathVQA may enhance the model’s image comprehension abilities. However, the poorer performance of LLaVA-Med-SLAKE+, compared to LLaVA-Med+, challenges the hypothesis that fine-tuning on a VQA task universally improves model capabilities. The difference between LLaVA-Med-SLAKE+ and LLaVA-Med-PathVQA+ could be attributed to differences in image modal-ities between PathVQA, which focuses on pathology images, and SLAKE, which is centered on radiology images; this may align better with Medical-Checklist. 

D. Analysis of Factors Influencing Model Performance 

We conducted experiments to explore various factors influ-encing model performance on the Medical-Checklist dataset. These experiments aim to understand the impact of different input characteristics and model-specific behaviors on accuracy, including caption length, vocabulary preferences, and the similarity of replacement terms. 

1) Caption Length: To investigate how the length of captions affects model accuracy, we grouped the captions into nine intervals based on the token count. The performance of each model was analyzed across these intervals. Fig. 4 shows the accuracy of each model within these bins. The results show that MedCLIP, PMC-CLIP, and LLaVA-Med maintain 8 IEEE TRANSACTIONS AND JOURNALS TEMPLATE      

> TABLE V TOP -PERFORMING MEDICAL TERMS AND THEIR ASSOCIATED ACCURACY SCORES FOR EACH MODEL .
> Model Top-Performing Medical Terms (Accuracy)
> MedCLIP ExAblate 4000 Type 2.0 (0.8000), Ascites (0.6613), Bronchiectasis (0.6591), macular (0.6313) PMC-CLIP Dental caries (0.6889), macular (0.6768), ExAblate 4000 Type 2.0 (0.6300), Cerebrovascular accident (0.6215) M3AE Hydrocephalus (0.7697), Subarachnoid Space (0.7677), Kidney (0.7458), Sinogram (0.7400) LLaVA-Med Kidney (0.5876), Hypostasis (0.5500), Cerebrovascular accident (0.5311), Dental caries (0.5278)

relatively 50% accuracy in all bins, indicating that their per-formance is not affected by caption length. In contrast, M3AE achieves higher accuracy in shorter captions. We attribute this to M3AE’s token-level supervision via Masked Image Modeling (MIM) and Masked Language Modeling (MLM). With shorter captions, each masked token represented a larger proportion of the input, providing a stronger learning signal. 

2) Vocabulary Preference: This experiment explores the vo-cabulary biases of each model by analyzing the set of medical terms each model prefers. Table V shows the vocabulary preferences of each model. The results show that each model prefers a different set of medical terms. It also suggests that any vocabulary bias in the Medical-Checklist dataset is minor or insufficient to impact model performance. 

3) Replacement-Term Similarity: The similarity of replace-ment terms between positive and negative captions was quanti-fied using SapBERT [45] cosine similarity. These scores were divided into nine bins, ranging from 0 to 1, with 0 indi-cating completely unrelated terms and 1 indicating identical meaning. Fig 5 shows each model’s accuracy across these bins. MedCLIP, PMC-CLIP, and LLaVA-Med achieve roughly 50% accuracy in all bins. M3AE reaches 66% accuracy in the lowest similarity bin, which decreases steadily as the similarity increases. This trend is expected. When replacement terms are highly dissimilar, models can readily distinguish the correct caption from the negative one, but discrimination becomes more difficult as term similarity increases. 

Summary of findings. These results confirm—and indeed strengthen—our observation from Section IV-B and IV-C that current multimodal models do not fully grasp medical concepts across vision and language. Our baseline observations remain robust under variations in caption length, vocabulary choice, and replacement-term similarity. 

V. C ONCLUSION 

In this study, we proposed Medical-Checklist, a new bench-mark designed to evaluate whether medical multimodal mod-els possess the fundamental medical knowledge required to understand medical images. Unlike existing medical VQA datasets, which typically include clinically plausible distrac-tors, our benchmark presents each medical image with a pair of captions: one correct and one clearly incorrect, generated by randomly substituting a medical term in the sentence. This setup enables us to assess whether models can reject medically nonsensical descriptions, thereby testing their grasp of basic medical concepts. We evaluated four state-of-the-art medical multimodal mod-els that have demonstrated strong performance on existing benchmarks. However, none of the models were able to pass the Medical-Checklist; they consistently failed to distinguish correct captions from clearly incorrect ones with the expected level of accuracy. These results reveal a significant gap be-tween high performance on conventional benchmarks and gen-uine conceptual understanding, pointing to the limitations of current evaluation methodologies. This finding highlights the need for more rigorous and conceptually grounded evaluation methods—an essential step toward ensuring that multimodal AI systems can be deployed safely and reliably in real-world medical settings. 0-5   

> 5-10
> 10-15
> 15-20
> 20-25
> 25-30
> 30-35
> 35-40
> 40-45
> 45+
> Caption Length Bin
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> Accuracy
> Accuracy Across Caption Length Bins
> MedCLIP
> PMC-CLIP
> M3AE
> LLaVA-Med
> Fig. 4. Model accuracy on Medical-Checklist across caption length. 0.00-0.10
> 0.10-0.20
> 0.20-0.30
> 0.30-0.40
> 0.40-0.50
> 0.50-0.60
> 0.60-0.70
> 0.70-0.80
> 0.80-0.90
> Similarity Bin
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> Accuracy
> Accuracy Across Similarity Bins
> MedCLIP
> PMC-CLIP
> M3AE
> LLaVA-Med
> Fig. 5. Model accuracy on Medical-Checklist across term similarity. AUTHOR et al. : TITLE 9

REFERENCES 

[1] J. Li, R. Selvaraju, A. Gotmare, S. Joty, C. Xiong, and S. C. H. Hoi, “Align before fuse: Vision and language representation learning with momentum distillation,” Advances in neural information processing systems , 2021. [2] J. Li, D. Li, C. Xiong, and S. Hoi, “Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training for unified vision-language understanding and generation,” in International Conference on Machine Learning , 2022, pp. 12 888– 12 900. [3] J. Yang, J. Duan, S. Tran, Y. Xu, S. Chanda, L. Chen, B. Zeng, T. Chilimbi, and J. Huang, “Vision-language pre-training with triple contrastive learning,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2022, pp. 15 671–15 680. [4] H. Liu, C. Li, Q. Wu, and Y. J. Lee, “Visual instruction tuning,” 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 2024. [5] J. Li, D. Li, S. Savarese, and S. Hoi, “BLIP-2: bootstrapping language-image pre-training with frozen image encoders and large language models,” in ICML , 2023. [6] D. Zhu, J. Chen, X. Shen, X. Li, and M. Elhoseiny, “Minigpt-4: Enhancing vision-language understanding with advanced large language models,” arXiv:2304.10592 , 2023. [7] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal, G. Sastry, A. Askell, P. Mishkin, J. Clark et al. , “Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision,” in International conference on machine learning , 2021, pp. 8748–8763. [8] Z. Chen, G. Li, and X. Wan, “Align, reason and learn: Enhancing med-ical vision-and-language pre-training with knowledge,” in Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Multimedia , 2022, pp. 5152–5161. [9] Z. Chen, Y. Du, J. Hu, Y. Liu, G. Li, X. Wan, and T.-H. Chang, “Multi-modal masked autoencoders for medical vision-and-language pre-training,” in International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention , 2022, pp. 679–689. [10] C. Li, C. Wong, S. Zhang, N. Usuyama, H. Liu, J. Yang, T. Naumann, H. Poon, and J. Gao, “Llava-med: Training a large language-and-vision assistant for biomedicine in one day,” arXiv:2306.00890 , 2023. [11] Z. Wang, Z. Wu, D. Agarwal, and J. Sun, “Medclip: Contrastive learning from unpaired medical images and text,” in EMNLP , 2022. [12] W. Lin, Z. Zhao, X. Zhang, C. Wu, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, and W. Xie, “Pmc-clip: Contrastive language-image pre-training using biomedical documents,” in MICCAI , 2023. [13] A. Ben Abacha, M. Sarrouti, D. Demner-Fushman, S. A. Hasan, and H. M¨ uller, “Overview of the vqa-med task at imageclef 2021: Visual question answering and generation in the medical domain,” in Proceed-ings of the CLEF 2021 Conference and Labs of the Evaluation Forum-working notes , 2021. [14] B. Liu, L.-M. Zhan, L. Xu, L. Ma, Y. Yang, and X.-M. Wu, “Slake: A semantically-labeled knowledge-enhanced dataset for medical visual question answering,” in 2021 IEEE 18th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI) , 2021, pp. 1650–1654. [15] X. Zhang, C. Wu, Z. Zhao, W. Lin, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, and W. Xie, “Pmc-vqa: Visual instruction tuning for medical visual question answer-ing,” arXiv:2305.10415 , 2023. [16] S. Zhang, Y. Xu, N. Usuyama, J. Bagga, R. Tinn, S. Preston, R. Rao, M. Wei, N. Valluri, C. Wong et al. , “Large-scale domain-specific pre-training for biomedical vision-language processing,” arXiv:2303.00915 ,2023. [17] O. Pelka, S. Koitka, J. R¨ uckert, F. Nensa, and C. M. Friedrich, “Radiology objects in context (roco): a multimodal image dataset,” in 

Intravascular Imaging and Computer Assisted Stenting and Large-Scale Annotation of Biomedical Data and Expert Label Synthesis , 2018, pp. 180–189. [18] T.-L. Wu, S. Singh, S. Paul, G. Burns, and N. Peng, “Melinda: A multimodal dataset for biomedical experiment method classification,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2021, pp. 14 076–14 084. [19] D. Demner-Fushman, M. D. Kohli, M. B. Rosenman, S. E. Shooshan, L. Rodriguez, S. Antani, G. R. Thoma, and C. J. McDonald, “Preparing a collection of radiology examinations for distribution and retrieval,” 

Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association , 2016. [20] S. Subramanian, L. L. Wang, S. Mehta, B. Bogin, M. van Zuylen, S. Parasa, S. Singh, M. Gardner, and H. Hajishirzi, “Medicat: A dataset of medical images, captions, and textual references,” in Findings of EMNLP , 2020. [21] J. Irvin, P. Rajpurkar, M. Ko, Y. Yu, S. Ciurea-Ilcus, C. Chute, H. Mark-lund, B. Haghgoo, R. Ball, K. Shpanskaya et al. , “Chexpert: A large chest radiograph dataset with uncertainty labels and expert comparison,” in Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , 2019, pp. 590–597. [22] X. He, Y. Zhang, L. Mou, E. Xing, and P. Xie, “Pathvqa: 30000+ questions for medical visual question answering,” arXiv:2003.10286 ,2020. [23] J. J. Lau, S. Gayen, A. Ben Abacha, and D. Demner-Fushman, “A dataset of clinically generated visual questions and answers about radiology images,” Scientific data , 2018. [24] T. Zhao, T. Zhang, M. Zhu, H. Shen, K. Lee, X. Lu, and J. Yin, “Vl-checklist: Evaluating pre-trained vision-language models with objects, attributes and relations,” arXiv:2207.00221 , 2022. [25] M. Yuksekgonul, F. Bianchi, P. Kalluri, D. Jurafsky, and J. Zou, “When and why vision-language models behave like bags-of-words, and what to do about it?” in International Conference on Learning Representations ,2023. [26] T. Thrush, R. Jiang, M. Bartolo, A. Singh, A. Williams, D. Kiela, and C. Ross, “Winoground: Probing vision and language models for visio-linguistic compositionality,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2022, pp. 5238–5248. [27] T. Han, L. C. Adams, K. Bressem, F. Busch, L. Huck, S. Nebelung, and D. Truhn, “Comparative analysis of gpt-4vision, gpt-4 and open source llms in clinical diagnostic accuracy: A benchmark against human expertise,” medRxiv , 2023. [28] T. Buckley, J. A. Diao, A. Rodman, and A. K. Manrai, “Accu-racy of a vision-language model on challenging medical cases,” 

arXiv:2311.05591 , 2023. [29] Z. Yang, Z. Yao, M. Tasmin, P. Vashisht, W. S. Jang, B. Wang, D. Berlowitz, and H. Yu, “Performance of multimodal gpt-4v on usmle with image: Potential for imaging diagnostic support with explanations,” 

medRxiv , 2023. [30] P. Chen, Z. Huang, Z. Deng, T. Li, Y. Su, H. Wang, J. Ye, Y. Qiao, and J. He, “Enhancing medical task performance in gpt-4v: A comprehensive study on prompt engineering strategies,” arXiv:2312.04344 , 2023. [31] C. Wu, J. Lei, Q. Zheng, W. Zhao, W. Lin, X. Zhang, X. Zhou, Z. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang et al. , “Can gpt-4v (ision) serve medical applications? case studies on gpt-4v for multimodal medical diagnosis,” 

arXiv:2310.09909 , 2023. [32] Z. Yan, K. Zhang, R. Zhou, L. He, X. Li, and L. Sun, “Multimodal chatgpt for medical applications: an experimental study of gpt-4v,” 

arXiv:2310.19061 , 2023. [33] J.-B. Alayrac, J. Donahue, P. Luc, A. Miech, I. Barr, Y. Hasson, K. Lenc, A. Mensch, K. Millican, M. Reynolds, R. Ring, E. Rutherford, S. Cabi, T. Han, Z. Gong, S. Samangooei, M. Monteiro, J. Menick, S. Borgeaud, A. Brock, A. Nematzadeh, S. Sharifzadeh, M. Binkowski, R. Barreira, O. Vinyals, A. Zisserman, and K. Simonyan, “Flamingo: a visual language model for few-shot learning,” ArXiv , vol. abs/2204.14198, 2022. [34] C. Wu, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, and W. Xie, “Towards generalist foundation model for radiology,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.02463 ,2023. [35] B. Boecking, N. Usuyama, S. Bannur, D. C. Castro, A. Schwaighofer, S. Hyland, M. Wetscherek, T. Naumann, A. Nori, J. Alvarez-Valle et al. ,“Making the most of text semantics to improve biomedical vision– language processing,” in European conference on computer vision , 2022. [36] A. Ben Abacha, S. A. Hasan, V. V. Datla, D. Demner-Fushman, and H. M¨ uller, “Vqa-med: Overview of the medical visual question answering task at imageclef 2019,” in Proceedings of CLEF (Conference and Labs of the Evaluation Forum) 2019 Working Notes , 2019. [37] Y. Hu, T. Li, Q. Lu, W. Shao, J. He, Y. Qiao, and P. Luo, “Omnimedvqa: A new large-scale comprehensive evaluation benchmark for medical lvlm,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , June 2024, pp. 22 170–22 183. [38] U. Naseem, M. Khushi, A. G. Dunn, and J. Kim, “K-pathvqa: Knowledge-aware multimodal representation for pathology visual ques-tion answering,” IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics ,vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 1886–1895, 2024. [39] OpenAI, “Gpt-4v(ision) technical work and authors,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://cdn.openai.com/contributions/gpt-4v.pdf [40] O. Bodenreider, “The unified medical language system (umls): integrat-ing biomedical terminology,” Nucleic acids research , 2004. [41] I. Beltagy, K. Lo, and A. Cohan, “Scibert: Pretrained language model for scientific text,” in EMNLP , 2019. [42] M. Neumann, D. King, I. Beltagy, and W. Ammar, “ScispaCy: Fast and Robust Models for Biomedical Natural Language Processing,” in 10 IEEE TRANSACTIONS AND JOURNALS TEMPLATE 

Proceedings of the 18th BioNLP Workshop and Shared Task , 2019, pp. 319–327. [43] B. Gordon, Y. Bitton, Y. Shafir, R. Garg, X. Chen, D. Lischinski, D. Cohen-Or, and I. Szpektor, “Mismatch quest: Visual and textual feedback for image-text misalignment,” arXiv:2312.03766 , 2023. [44] Y. Zhong, J. Yang, P. Zhang, C. Li, N. Codella, L. H. Li, L. Zhou, X. Dai, L. Yuan, Y. Li et al. , “Regionclip: Region-based language-image pretraining,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2022, pp. 16 793–16 803. [45] F. Liu, E. Shareghi, Z. Meng, M. Basaldella, and N. Collier, “Self-alignment pretraining for biomedical entity representations,” in Pro-ceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , Jun. 2021. 

Mr. Bannapol Limanond is currently pursuing a Ph.D. degree at the Graduate School of Informa-tion Sciences, Tohoku University. His research interests are in the fields of medical computer vision and natural language processing. 

Dr. Masanori Suganuma received the Ph.D. degree from Graduate School of Environment and Information Sciences, Yokohama National University, in 2017. He is currently an Assistant Professor at Tohoku University. His research in-terests are in the field of computer vision and machine learning. 

Dr. Takayuki Okatani earned his B.Eng., M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in Mathematical Engineer-ing and Information Physics from the Graduate School of Engineering at the University of Tokyo in 1994, 1996, and 1999, respectively. He cur-rently serves as a Professor in the area of com-puter vision at Tohoku University. In addition, he heads the Infrastructure Management Robotics Team at the RIKEN Center for Advanced Intel-ligence Project. With over 100 publications in peer-reviewed journals and conference proceed-ings, his work encompasses computer vision, deep learning, and multi-modal AI. He is an active member of several professional societies, in-cluding the IEEE Computer Society, the Information Processing Society of Japan, the Institute of Electronics, Information and Communication Engineers, and the Society of Instrument and Control Engineers.